---
title: Glossary
---

= GLOSSARY =

There are a ''lot'' of different codewords and jargon involved with HP hardware. This page attempts to help.

; '''Artist'''
: GSC Graphics Accelerator
; '''ASP'''
: Host bus adapter used in older workstations. The predecessor to [#lasi Lasi].
; '''Astro'''
: Integrated Runway to Ropes bridge, Memory controller, and IOA.
; '''Bravehawk'''
: The PA-8200 based K class servers.
; '''CIO'''
: Channel I/O. The predecessor to [#hppb HP-PB].
; '''Crayon'''
: Also a graphics thingy (thanks to Martin Petersen for this answer)
; '''Cujo'''
: [#dino Dino] with a 64-bit data path. Doesn't support dual address cycle.
; '''Dino'''
: GSC to PCI Bridge. Integrated PS/2, Serial port, and fire extinguisher.
; '''ELF'''
: Executable &amp; Linking Format. Linux/PA-RISC executables &amp; libraries all use this format. HP-UX uses it for 64-bit executables.
; '''Elroy'''
: Ropes to PCI Bridge. Used in current B/C/J/L/N-class machines. Supports 4X PCI and dual address cycle.
; '''EPIC'''
: Excalibur PCI-bus Interface Chip. Integrated IOA. Used in V-class.
; '''Gecko'''
: The codename for the 712 series of workstations.
; '''GSC'''
: HP proprietary bus. Initially used for I/O, but PA-7100LC &amp; PA-7300LC processors connect directly to the GSC bus. GSC comes in several variants:
:; '''GSC-1X'''
:: The original GSC bus implemented on PCX-L and used in the Gecko, Mirage and Electra computers. Peak Bandwidth 142MB/s w/DMA, 106 MB/s with PIO writes.
:; '''GSC '''
:: Enhancements added for KittyHawk/SkyHawk (U2 chip) that allow for pending transactions. GSC enhancements are orthogonal to the GSC-1.5X and GSC-2X enhancements. Aka "Extended GSC" or "EGSC".
:; '''GSC-1.5X'''
:: GSC-1X with an additional variable length write transaction.
:; '''GSC-2X'''
:: GSC-1.5X with a protocol enhancement to allow data to be sent at double the GCLK rate (Peak bandwidth = 256 MB/s)
; '''Harmony'''
: Lasi sound device
; '''HIL'''
: Human Interface Loop. A HP proprietary interface for connecting I/O devices like keyboards, mice or tablets.
; '''HPMC'''
: High Priority Machine Check. Fatal system error. PDC saves machine state in the [#pim PIM].
; '''HP-PB'''
: Hewlett Packard-Precision Bus. HP proprietary I/O bus. Aka NIO.
; '''IOA'''
: IO Adapter. Aka "I/O MMU". Generally handles I/O coherency.
; '''ITE'''
: Internal Terminal Emulator. Describes the text display at machine startup.
; '''Kittyhawk'''
: The PA-7200 based K class servers.
; '''Lasi'''
: An integrated IO controller (serial, parallel, SCSI, PS/2 keyboard and mouse) found in many workstations.
; '''LPMC'''
: Low Priority Machine Check. Generally a recoverable system error.
; '''Mirage'''
: The codename for the later series of 715 workstations.
; '''Mohawk'''
: The PA-8000 based K class servers.
; '''Mongoose'''
: The EISA bus adapter found in 715/720/725/730/735/750/755 machines.
; '''Nova'''
: The codename for the F, G, H and I class servers.
; '''NIO'''
: See [#hppb HP-PB]
; '''PDC'''
: Processor dependent code. Machine specific assembler code from flash memory or ROM.
; '''PIM'''
: Processor Internal Memory. Machine state is saved here for [#hpmc HPMC], [#lpmc LPMC], and [#toc TOC]'s. See PDC_PIM in "PDC Procedures" chapter of PA I/O ACD.
; '''Runway'''
: PA-7200, -8000, -8200, -8500 processors connect directly to the Runway bus.
; '''SAGA'''
: [#epic EPIC] with a 64-bit data path. Doesn't support dual address cycle.
; '''Scorpio'''
: The codename for the earlier series of 715 workstations.
; '''SGC'''
: Systems Graphics Connect.
; '''Snakes'''
: The original HP workstations; the 705, 710, 720, 730 and 750.
; '''SOM'''
: Spectrum Object Format. This is the executable &amp; library format used by HP-UX for 32-bit executables. Spectrum was the codename for PA-RISC.
; '''STI'''
: Standard Text Interface.
; '''SuckyIO'''
: National Semiconductor PC87560UBD, aka "SuperIO". Provides IDE, USB 1.1, Floppy Disk Controller, parallel port, 2 serial ports, UIR (infrared), etc. But since National denies the existence of this chip and HP was the only client for this buggy PoS, the name "SuckyIO" has stuck.
; '''Summit'''
: A proprietary bus used in the T-class.
; '''Summit96 / Summit98'''
: Codename for chipset of the Visualize-FX graphic card series.
; '''SuperIO'''
: See [#suckyio SuckyIO].
; '''TOC'''
: Transfer of Control. On workstations which have it, basically a "RESET" button. Servers may have more advanced features.
; '''U2'''
: Runway to GSC Bus bridge &amp; IOA. Found in some C/D/J/K/R-class systems.
; '''UltraLight'''
: The codename for the D class servers.
; '''Uturn'''
: [#u2 U2] follow on. Differences not visible to OS software.
; '''Venom'''
: Graphics Accelerator found in older workstations
; '''Viper'''
: Memory controller
; '''Wax'''
: GSC to EISA Bridge found in older systems (including B/C/D/R-class). Has often one integrated [#hil HIL port] and one serial port.
; '''Wright Brothers'''
: The codename for the E class servers.