---
title: HPUX-9
---

NOTE: This information is taken from:<br>
https://web-docs.gsi.de/~kraemer/COLLECTION/HPUX/scratch.html<br>

<h2>HP-UX 9.x/8.x installation from scratch</h2>
<HR> 
 
<h2>Prerequisites</h2> 
 
HP-UX 9.x/8.x does not install on disks larger than 2GB (exactly). 
It may boot off the <code>Install</code> media, but the subsequent
<code>CoreOS</code> installation will fail.
The typical message is a complaint about at least 55MB which have to
be free for swap space.  

<br> 
HP-UX 9.x installs trouble-free only on disks listed in  
[https://web-docs.gsi.de/~kraemer/COLLECTION/HPUX/disktab9x.txt <code>/etc/disktab/</code>],  
the larger ones being:
<ul> 
<li>Quantum PD425S</li> 
<li>Quantum LPS525S</li> 
<li>Quantum PD1050S</li> 
<li>Micropolis 1588[T], 660MB </li> 
<li>Micropolis 1528, 1.4GB</li> 
<li>Micropolis 1924, largeish ? </li> 
<li>Seagate ST3600N, 525MB</li> 
<li>HP C3010</li> 
<li>HP C2247, 1GB</li> 
<li>HP C2235, 420MB</a> 
</li> 
</ul> 

<br> 
HP-UX 8.x is even more restrictive,  
[https://web-docs.gsi.de/~kraemer/COLLECTION/HPUX/disktab8x.txt <code>/etc/disktab/</code>].  
I had to resort to the antique Seagate ST3600N to get it to install.

<br>
Some disks not listed in <code>/etc/disktab/</code> are installable too, 
after some warnings (which can be ignored in my experience) from the installation procedure: 
<ul> 
<li> 
IBM/Quantum Fireball 1280 
</li> 
<li> 
IBM DPES 31080
</li> 
<li> 
Seagate ST11200N
</li> 
</ul> 
 
<br> 
HP-UX 9.x takes at least 200MB, &gt;330MB with NLS support, plus 55MB for swap space, 
thus a 400 to 420MB disk is minimum. If the LaserROM documentation should reside 
on the same disk it would have to be as large as 1GB. In this case disk space
is very tight, so one might consider to install the LaserROM on a separate
second disk, if possible.
<br>
All this doesn't include user and freeware filesystems. 
 
<H2>Base system</H2> 
 
<h3>From CD </h3> 
 
<ol> 
<li> 
Straightforward.  
Insert <code>Install</code> CD, cycle power. 
During startup press <code>ESC</code> to allow boot media select. 
<br>
<ul> 
<li> On 300/400 series: 
<br> (soon to come)
</li>
<li> On 700/800 series: <br>
A bootable device list appears.
<br>
On some models a <code>BOOT_ADMIN</code> console will allow further actions.
<br>
Anyway,
<pre> 
boot scsi.x 
</pre> 
where <code>x</code> is the CD's SCSI address. 
</li>
</ul>
Answer the questions and accept the defaults.
One may alter some of the root filesystem parameters, e.g.
increase swap space beyond the proposed value (but not larger than
128MB if LaserROM should coexist on the same 1GB disk). 
<br> 
Leave/set date below Y2K. 
</li> 
<li> 
On request (update): insert <code>Core OS</code> CD and proceed.
For external CD-ROM drives this might involve power cycling.
<br> 
If this does not work (as experienced e.g. with series 400 systems):  
<ol> 
<li> 
press <code>Reset</code>, reboot and press 
<code>ESC</code> to allow selection of a minimal system (<code>SYSHPUX</code>).  
</li> 
<li> Then 
<pre> 
mount /dev/bsrc /UPDATE_CDROM; rm /update.lock; /etc/update 
</pre> 
</li> 
</ol> 
Accept proposed default terminal. 
<li> 
In the presented menu choose 
<code>Change Source/Destination</code> and select CD-ROM, no password.  
Press <code>Done</code>/<code>F4</code> 
</li> 
</li> 
<li> 
In the presented menu choose installation method.
In my experience one may <code>Select all filesets</code> 
and install just everything (ca. 160 MB) 
</li> 
 
<li> 
Apply Y2K patches <em>(HP-UX 9.1 for series 300/400 only)</em>:  
<br> 
Insert CD, power cycle CD-ROM drive and  
<pre> 
mount /dev/bsrc /UPDATE_CDROM; rm /update.lock; /etc/update</code> 
</pre> 
If the mount fails, reboot and repeat. 
<br> 
Alternative mount method: 
<pre> 
mount -r -t cdfs /dev/dsk/cEd3s0 /UPDATE_CDROM         # CD with SCSI ID=3 
rm /update.lock; /etc/update                           # or use VUE toolbox, if active 
</pre> 
In the presented menu change installation source to CD-ROM and 
select/install all filesets. 
</li> 
<li> If available, Tools and Languages (C,Pascal,FORTRAN):<br> 
reboot with CD inserted, (alternatively try switch off/on CD drive)<br>   
<code>mount /dev/bsrc /UPDATE_CDROM; rm /update.lock; /etc/update</code><br> 
or 
<pre> 
mount -r -t cdfs /dev/dsk/cEd3s0 /UPDATE_CDROM         # CD with SCSI ID=3 
rm /update.lock; /etc/update                           # or use VUE toolbox, if active 
</pre> 
Select/install all filesets, 
may skip NLS stuff 
</li> 
<li>
On request and if the machine is already connected to a network
one may configure it already during installation.
Just answer the questions on 
<br>
network mask (e.g. 255.255.255.0) 
<br>
and Gateway address (e.g. 192.168.1.1 for a router),
a (dummy) name must also be given.
</li> 
<li>
After (<code>root</code>) login
start multi-user level, includes starting VUE: 
<pre> 
init 3 
</pre> 
</li> 

<li>
<strong>Note</strong> that if one chooses to leave the date as is,
to avoid Y2K issues, one might have to 
<a href="faqhowto.html#Trouble">fix SAM's other date related problems</a>. 
</li>
 
</ol>