---
title: Main Page
---

== Introduction to Linux on PA-RISC ==

The PA-RISC project provides a ''native'' port of Linux to the PA-RISC architecture. The port was merged into linux-2.6 and linux-3.x mainstream Linux kernel tree.
[[PA-RISC Linux Project History]] tells how the project got started and the first steps.
Contact the [[Mailing lists]] if you want to volunteer your time.

See the [[Hall of Fame]] for a list of folks who brought you the initial 0.9x and Debian 3.0 releases.
That includes boot loader, kernel, documentation, user space programs, packaging, testing, debugging, and pulling everything together into an ISO.

== Linux distributions with support for PA-RISC Linux == 

PA-RISC Linux is currently supported by [http://wiki.parisc-linux.org/Distributions various Linux distributions], whith [http://www.gentoo.org Gentoo Linux] and [http://www.debian.org Debian] being the ones which currently provide the best support for the PA-RISC architecture.

; Gentoo Linux:
: PA-RISC is a fully supported architecture of Gentoo Linux.<br>
: Many thanks to the smart people of the [http://www.gentoo.org/proj/en/base/hppa Gentoo Linux HPPA Development team] for providing [http://www.gentoo.org/main/en/where.xml Gentoo Linux installation ISOs available for download]!
: If you wish to install Gentoo Linux for PA-RISC, we suggest that your read the [http://www.gentoo.org/doc/en/handbook/handbook-hppa.xml Handbook on how to install Gentoo Linux for PA-RISC].

; Debian Linux:
: The PA-RISC Linux development community is proud to have been officially part of the Debian 3.1 (sarge), 4.0 (etch) and 5.0 (lenny) releases.
: As of Debian 6.0 (squeeze) PA-RISC Linux was dropped in July 2011 as officially supported platform which is why the PA-RISC Linux development currently happens as Debian-unofficial architecture in the [http://www.debian-ports.org Debian Ports] project.
: A new Debian 8 (jessie) install image has been released for PA-RISC, which is available at [http://ftp.debian-ports.org/debian-cd/hppa/debian-8.0 the debian-ports download site] and his Wiki contains a [[Debian Ports Installation | description on how to install Debian Linux]].
 
'''Before downloading any ISOs for Gentoo, Debian or any other Linux distribution, first check the
[[PARISC FAQ]] and [[Hardware support]] for issues specific to your hardware.'''

== PA-RISC NEWS == 
* '''Apr 2016''' - Improved kernel ftrace support and added kernel regset support. Added native high-resolution clock support into Linux Kernel. Additional debian buildd make server added (savaria.parisc-linux.org). 
* '''Mar 2016''' - Solved a [https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=70188 bug in gcc-4.9 (and higher)] which [http://article.gmane.org/gmane.linux.ports.parisc/26425 crashes kernel 4.3+ in the SCSI/block layer]. 
* '''Feb 2016''' - We now have [http://buildd.debian-ports.org/status/architecture.php?a=hppa&suite=sid more than 11.000 pre-built debian unstable packages]. Many bugs in kernel and userspace were fixed. 
* '''Jan 2016''' - Reached [http://buildd.debian-ports.org/status/architecture.php?a=hppa&suite=sid more than 10.900 pre-built debian unstable packages]. 
* '''Dec 2015''' - [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=736d2169338a50c8814efc186b5423aee43b0c68 Huge Page support for PA-RISC was added to the Linux Kernel]. A long-standing [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=71a71fb5374a23be36a91981b5614590b9e722c3 syscall restart bug was fixed].
* '''Oct 2015''' - Dave & Helge fixed some bugs in [https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=68079 gcc] and [https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=19170 glibc] which e.g. fixed the build of Qt5/KDE packages. For the first time ever we now have more pre-built debian packages than alpha or ppc64 and reached [http://buildd.debian-ports.org/status/architecture.php?a=hppa&suite=sid more than 10.800 packages].
* '''Sep 2015''' - We have an additional Debian buildd server (phantom.parisc-linux.org with 4 x 1 GHz PA8900 CPUs, 12 GB RAM, 120 GB SSD) online. Dave [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=1b59ddfcf1678de38a1f8ca9fb8ea5eebeff1843 fixed 64bit CAS LWS so that we will get 64bit gcc atomic builtins]. Helge [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b1b4e435e4ef7de77f07bf2a42c8380b960c2d44 fixed boot problems because of early serial port irqs on C8000 with PA8900 CPUs].
* '''Aug 2015''' - One of our buildd servers (hpviz) died. Debian-ports archive is now integrated with Debian buildd service again. 
* '''Jul 2015''' - Reached [http://buildd.debian-ports.org/status/architecture.php?a=hppa&suite=sid more than 10.700 pre-built debian unstable packages]. 
* '''Jun 2015''' - Reached [http://buildd.debian-ports.org/status/architecture.php?a=hppa&suite=sid more than 10.600 pre-built debian unstable packages]. 
* '''Apr 2015''' - Reached [http://buildd.debian-ports.org/status/architecture.php?a=hppa&suite=sid more than 10.520 pre-built debian unstable packages] which is just around 60 packages less than the leading debian-ports architectures alpha and ppc64. 
* '''Mar 2015''' - Installation numbers of hppa debian machines grow to 25 in the [http://popcon.debian.org Debian Popularity Contest].
* '''Feb 2015''' - [http://ftp.debian-ports.org/debian-cd/hppa/debian-8.0/ DEBIAN 8.0 (jessie) Installer images] and [[Debian_Ports_Installation|Installation instructions]] now available.
* '''Jan 2015''' - Compared to other architectures on debian-ports, the PA-RISC / HPPA architecture now has the most number of packages up-to-date:  http://buildd.debian-ports.org/stats/graph2-week-big.png
* '''Dec 2014''' - Full range of gcc atomic builtins committed into gcc-4.9 which helped us to build packages which were not posible before (in total we are now at 10.400 prebuilt debian packages).
* '''Nov 2014''' - We now fully support systemd with debian packages glibc-2.19-13 and linux-image-3.16.0-4 (kernel 3.16.7). The [http://dir.gmane.org/gmane.linux.ports.parisc contents of the parisc-linux kernel mailinglist were imported into gmane.org archive]
* '''Oct 2014''' - [http://buildd.debian-ports.org/status/architecture.php?a=hppa&suite=sid Reached 10.300 pre-built debian unstable packages]. [https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/5048751 Upcoming patches to support systemd on hppa]
* '''Sep 2014''' - Browsers will now automatically be transferred to this Wiki if one visits http://www.parisc-linux.org . [http://buildd.debian-ports.org/status/architecture.php?a=hppa&suite=sid We now have more than 10.200 pre-built debian unstable packages].
* '''Aug 2014''' - [http://buildd.debian-ports.org/status/architecture.php?a=hppa&suite=sid We now have more than 10.100 pre-built debian unstable packages]. Helge Deller now owns and maintains the parisc-linux domain.
* '''Jul 2014''' - New [[Debian Ports Installation | Debian unstable installer images available]]. Reached [http://buildd.debian-ports.org/status/architecture.php?a=hppa&suite=sid more than 10.000 pre-built debian unstable packages].
* '''Jun 2014''' - The A500-44 is up and running as additional debian buildd server at http://parisc.osuosl.org. Kernel 3.15 is out. Added a very fast 4-way 1GHz C8000 machine with 250GB SATA SSD drive as additional Debian buildd server (sibaris.parisc-linux.org), machine and hosting sponsored by [mailto:pannonmage@googlemail.com Bálint Sándor Németh]. 
* '''May 2014''' - More than 9900 debian packages built. Kernel 3.15 will be the most best kernel ever. The A500 (mkhppa3) buildd which was sponsored and hosted by ESIEE sadly died.
* '''Apr 2014''' - The PARISC boot loader palo is back in debian unstable. More than 9750 debian packages built.
* '''Mar 2014''' - The A500-44 which hosted our main webpage is being moved to OSUOSL.org. More than 9500 debian packages built.
* '''Feb 2014''' - The new parisc Wiki is now at http://parisc.wiki.kernel.org. Contents of the old Wiki at wiki.parisc-linux.org was moved and the webpage redirects here.
* '''Jan 2014''' - Updated [[Debian_Ports_Installation|Debian unstable install instructions]]. More than [http://buildd.debian-ports.org/stats 8000 newly built native Debian packages] available.
* '''Dec 2013''' - [http://unstable.buildd.net/index-hppa.html 5 buildd servers for debian unstable online]. The servers hpviz and rio including hosting are sponsored by Dave Land - http://landcomp.net. Stable Debian kernel 3.12 available. 
* '''Aug 2013''' - Linux kernel 3.11 supports C8000 workstation (SMP, serial port, FireGL card, BMC, ...)
* '''Apr 2013''' - Website updated, added [[Debian_Ports_Installation|Debian ports installation instructions]] and updated [[TODO]] list.
* '''Mar 2013''' - Debian 7.0 (wheezy) without HPPA.
* '''Feb 2013''' - Many PA-RISC Linux kernel patches have been integrated into Kernel 3.8. Stability will improve even further with kernel 3.9.
* '''Feb 2012''' - Website is back up! Work continues on the debian-ports support for HPPA.
* '''Sep 2010''' - HPPA dropped as an official release architecture for squeeze.
* '''Sep 2009''' - NPTL transition is ready, thanks to the efforts of Carlos!
* '''Feb 2009''' - Debian 5.0!
* '''Apr 2007''' - Debian 4.0!
* '''Jul 2006''' - James fixes (mostly) parisc-linux on PA8800! w00t!
* '''Mar 2006''' - Fixed stifb on 64-bit machines. X now works with a 64-bit kernel!
* '''Dec 2005''' - Fixed framebuffer console on 32bit HCRX graphic cards
* '''Dec 2005''' - PCMCIA support added (e.g. used in Tadpole PA-RISC laptops)
* '''Jun 2005''' - Debian 3.1!
* '''Mar 2005''' - The parisc-linux patch set is less than 200K for the first time ever! Thanks to willy for doing such a great job pushing patches upstream!
* '''Jun 2004''' - Support for PA8800/zx1 committed!

== How to install PARISC Linux == 
* [[Debian Ports Installation]]
* [http://www.gentoo.org/doc/en/handbook/handbook-hppa.xml Gentoo Installation]

== PA-RISC FAQ == 
* [[Hardware_support|Is my hardware supported?]]
* [[PARISC FAQ]]
* [[How to report a parisc-linux kernel problem|My kernel {crashed|hung}, how do I submit a useful bug report?]]
* [[Mailing lists]]
* [[Graphics howto]]
* [[Building_the_Kernel]] - Build Kernel
* [[TODO]]
* [[Debian_Buildpackages]] - How to build packages for debian?
* [[How to create Debian unstable iso images]]

== Documentation ==
* [[Overview_HP9000_Workstation_and_Servers]] - Overview of HP9000 Servers and Workstations
* [[Technical Documentation]] - hardware and platform documents
* [[LinuxKernel]] - Implementation details of Linux kernel on parisc
* Specific [[Documentation]] about the PA-RISC Linux port
* [[Debian Buildpackages]] - how to build debian packages for parisc
* [[TestCases]] - To be checked testcases which produced problems in the past

== External Resources ==

* http://www.openpa.net/index.html - The OpenPA Project
* http://www.debian.org/ports/hppa/ - Debian HPPA port page
* http://www.gentoo.org/doc/en/handbook/handbook-hppa.xml - Gentoo HPPA Handbook
* http://www.hpmuseum.net/collection_document.php - HP Computer Museum
* http://www.mach-linux.org/ - OSF Mach-Linux
* http://www.unixnerd.demon.co.uk/hp_unix.html - UnixNerds/HPUX
* http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/deller/parisc-linux.git - Helge's PARISC Linux Kernel git tree
* https://patchwork.kernel.org/project/linux-parisc/list - PARISC Linux Patchwork
* http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/deller/palo.git - PALO boot loader source code

* Archived historical webpages:
** http://www.parisc-linux.org/index.html - The former and now historical PA-RISC/Linux website
** http://pateam.parisc-linux.org - The PA/Linux ESIEE Team (former www.pateam.org webpage)