---
title: ProcessorLimitations
---

= Processor Limitations and Known Bugs =

This page is a non exhaustive list of PA-RISC CPUs ''features'', to be kept in mind when writing PA-RISC code, and especially kernel code.

== Cache ==

In spite of what the arch manual says (it says the congruence stride is 16MB), the congruence stride on
all manufactured parisc processors is 4MB.  This means that any virtual addresses, regardless of space id, that are equal modulo 4MB have the same cache colour. (See [http://article.gmane.org/gmane.linux.ports.parisc/2766 this thread]).

== PA 1.1 ==

=== Block TLB vs Variable page sizes ===

PA 1.1 does '''NOT''' support Variable page sizes. Only PA 2.0 processors have that.
But PA 1.1 does have "Block TLB" in some processor versions. Use PDC calls (firmware, see [[ProcessorDependentCode]]) to setup the BTLB entries when available.

== PA 2.0 ==

Specific issues of pa2.0 family.

=== Long divides ===

Unfortunately 64bit integer divides cannot be done using the FPU (the
limit is about 52bits).  This means that we must call millicode any
time a long is divided by another long.  This is really bad since the
<tt>DS</tt> instruction doesn't support 64bit division.  Instead the millicode
must perform long division (remember how long that took you in
gradeschool?) on a 64bit integer.  This can take as much as 500 cycles.

Suddenly we have gone from performing two divides of type long in '''60'''
cycles to one divide of type long in '''500''' cycles.  It is '''very important'''
that the appropriate casts to unsigned int are performed before doing divides
whenever possible.

Just keep that in mind when you see "<tt>/</tt>" operator in code.

=== Unsigned vs Signed ints ===

Under LP64, pointers are 64 bit quantities and integers are 32 bit quantities.
In a typical array reference, the index (an ''integer'') must be added to the
base address of the array (a ''pointer'') to obtain the address of the item
being accessed.  Before adding a 32bit item to a 64bit item, the 32bit
item must be sign extended to clear the garbage out of the top 32bits
of the register.  This sign extension is done with an extract (`EXTRD`)
operation and takes one cycle.  Here is the typical array reference:
 <nowiki>
register int a[];
register int i;

x = a[i]; </nowiki>

and the assembly code under PA1.1:
 <nowiki>LDWX    index(base),x </nowiki>
And finally the assembly code under PA2.0:
 <nowiki>
EXTRD,S index,63,32,temp_reg
LDWX    temp_reg(basereg),x </nowiki>

The cost of a '''typical array access''' is now '''4''' cycles instead of '''3''' cycles.
On average, applications doing this will suffer a 5-10% performance loss
due to these extra extracts.

=== PA-RISC CPU Cache Design ===

 "I/D": seperate Insn and Data Cache, Size is "each"
 "I+D": combined Insn and Data Cache, Size is "combined"
 WT == Write Through
 WB == Write Back
 
 PA1.x - 32 byte cacheline
 -----
  
 CPU             CPU             Cache Description
 Model           Mhz             Lx: Size/Index+Tag(Associative)
 ========        ==========      =======================================
 PCX             50 
 PCX-S           50/66
 
 PA7100/7150     99/125          L1: I/D, 1MB each max   VIPT(Direct)
        http://cpus.hp.com/technical_references/pa7200_design.pdf
 
 PA7200          100/120         "I+D Assist": 64x32B    VIPT(Fully)
 2-way superscaler               L1: Same as PA7100      VIPT(Direct)
         http://cpus.hp.com/technical_references/pa7200_design.pdf
   
 PA7100LC        60/80/100       "I-only Assist": 1KB    VIPT(Fully)
 2-way superscaler               L1: I+D 2MB max         VIPT(Direct)
        http://www.parisc-linux.org/documentation/index.html
 
 PA7300LC        132/160/180     L1: I/D 64k each        VIPT(2-way set)
 2-way superscaler               L2: 256KB-64MB, WT      PIPT(Direct)
        http://cpus.hp.com/technical_references/b7300lc.shtml
 
 
 PA 2.0
 ------
 - 64-byte L1 cacheline size
 - all 4-way superscaler
 
 PA8000          160/180         L1: I/D 0.5MB each      VIPT(Direct)
 
 PA8200          200/240         L1: I/D 1MB each        VIPT(Direct)
 
 PA8500          360/440         L1: I/D 0.50MB/1MB      VIPT(4-way set)
 PA8600          440/550         L1: I/D 0.75MB/1.5MB    VIPT(4-way set)
 PA8700          650/750         L1: I/D 0.75MB/1.5MB    VIPT(4-way set)
 PA8700+         875             L1: I/D 0.75MB/1.5MB    VIPT(4-way set)
 
 PA8800          900/1Ghz        L1: I/D 0.75MB/0.75MB   VIPT
                                 L2: I+D 32MB            PIPT