---
title: Status EarlyDevelopment
---

= Year 1999 =

'''December 31st, 1999'''

* LASI Serial driver
* HIL keyboard driver (Matthew)
* PS/2 LASI keyboard driver (Philipp)
* Extensive MM work (Philipp)
* LASI Sound (Philipp)

'''October 7, 1999'''

The following is a list of what has been accomplished in the PA-RISC Linux project over the past few months:

* interrupt handling now works
* the start of Virtual Memory has been completed
* hardware discovery through PDC works
* PCI bus walking with the Dino contoller is functional
* IO and MMIO space for the Dino PCI bus has been started
* we've moved to kernel version 2.2.13 as our base
* a shell loads and dies

'''June 25, 1999'''

* The kernel boots and promptly dies after displaying version information.

'''May 1, 1999'''

* The kernel builds! Work begins on getting the kernel to boot using a modified boot loader.

'''March, 1999'''

* Jason Eckhardt gets the boot loader working. Work starts on modifying the kernel for elementary parisc support.

'''October, 1998'''

* Martin Petersen, Alex deVries and Christopher Beard dream up the project at Atlanta Linux Showcase.

= Year 2000 =

'''18 December 2000'''

* Fix user stacks so they start at a reasonable address and grow upwards. (Matthew)

'''15 December 2000'''

* Added chassis LED- and LCD-driver. ([mailto:deller@gmx.de Helge])

'''5 December 2000'''

* Initial merge with Linus, including a few tidy-ups to our tree. (Alan Cox, Matthew Wilcox)

'''29 November 2000'''

* Fixed parallel port driver to not crash kernel on early ASP based machines. ([mailto:deller@gmx.de Helge])

'''10 November 2000'''

* Fixed remaining __FUNCTION__ usage to be complaint w/gcc definition ([mailto:grundler@puffin.external.hp.com Grant])
* Merge to linux-2.4.0-test10 completed ([mailto:bame@puffin.external.hp.com Paul Bame])
* palinux-linux v0.5 beta ISO published! ([mailto:pjlahaie@puffin.external.hp.com Paul Lahaie])
* Fixed strace ([mailto:rhirst@linuxcare.com Richard])

'''7 November 2000'''

* 64-bit: PCI Interrupt Routing (iosapic support) ([mailto:grundler@puffin.external.hp.com Grant])
* 64-bit: PCI Resource init/mngt ([mailto:grundler@puffin.external.hp.com Grant])
* "reboot" command works on c3k/j5k ([mailto:grundler@puffin.external.hp.com Grant])
* PS/2 keyboard driver is missing various important keysyms ([mailto:marteaut@esiee.fr Thomas Marteau (ESIEE Team)])
(No - I'm not the only person working on this port - just happen to muck with this list more than anyone else. :^) -grant)

'''24 October 2000'''

* 64-bit: Fixed PDC wrappers so upper half of "callee saves" register don't get trashed [mailto:bame@puffin.external.hp.com Paul])
* VM: Paging now works ([mailto:john_marvin@hp.com John])
* VM: Fixed most outstanding bugs! A180 is quite stable now... ([mailto:john_marvin@hp.com John])
* PA1.1 Hand-Tuned/Optimised asm IP checksum code ([mailto:tausq@tausq.org Randolph])
* SMP : add cpuinfo_parisc cpu_data[] and fix boot_cpu_data usage ([mailto:grundler@puffin.external.hp.com Grant])
* update /proc/interrupts info ([mailto:deller@gmx.de Helge])
* Added "bits_wide" parameter to txn_alloc_data(). ([mailto:grundler@puffin.external.hp.com Grant])

'''17 October 2000'''

* dynamic user stack. ( [mailto:rhirst@linuxcare.com Richard]/ [mailto:dhd@puffin.external.hp.com David] )
* Finish ptrace(2) implementation. ([mailto:tsbogend@alpha.franken.de Thomas])
* STI fbcon driver - STI console works ([mailto:dhd@puffin.external.hp.com David])
* update "How-To Build the Kernel" recipe ([mailto:amodra@linuxcare.com Alan Modra])
* 64-bit kernel : PAT PDC device discovery ([mailto:grundler@puffin.external.hp.com Grant])
* Smarter resource mgmt in ccio driver ([mailto:rbradetich@uswest.net Ryan])
* Smarter resource mgmt in sba driver ([mailto:grundler@puffin.external.hp.com Grant])
* Implement kernel module loading (this is half userspace work). ( [mailto:rhirst@linuxcare.com Richard]/ [mailto:dhd@puffin.external.hp.com David] )

'''10 October 2000'''

* Kernel built/booted all native! ([mailto:rhirst@linuxcare.com Richard])
* base/glibc/gcc/etc debs are now available ([mailto:dhd@puffin.external.hp.com David])
* STI console driver([mailto:deller@gmx.de Helge] and [mailto:bame@puffin.external.hp.com Paul])
* Smarter resource mgmt in ccio driver ([mailto:rbradetich@uswest.net Ryan])
* merged rbrad's changes into sba ([mailto:grundler@puffin.external.hp.com Grant])
* User stack grows dynamically! ([mailto:rhirst@linuxcare.com Richard])
* flush_kernel_dcache_range(): off-by-one bug found/fixed by fleedwood/jsm
* SBA I/O MMU: LCI bug fixed w/help from chada/jsm
* 64-bit kernel almost gets to user space on c3k

'''28 August 2000'''

* Linux syscalls ([mailto:john_marvin@hp.com John])
* Signals ([mailto:dhd@puffin.external.hp.com David])
* Check other arches for <u>new</u> syscalls we don't have and add them. ([mailto:matthew@wil.cx Matthew])
* WAX EISA adapter. ([mailto:deller@gmx.de Helge])
* Symbios 8xx SCSI driver ([mailto:rhirst@linuxcare.com Richard])
* NCR 720 Zalon SCSI driver ([mailto:rhirst@linuxcare.com Richard])

'''11 March 2000''' '''Kernel'''

* NCR710 driver ([mailto:gyula_matics@hp.com Gyula])
* pci_consistent() interfaces implementation ([mailto:grundler@puffin.external.hp.com Grant])
* ELF-reenable the kernel ([mailto:sammy@sammy.net Sam])

'''13 February 2000'''

Kernel

* IO SAPIC support (Grant)
* C3000/J5000 PCI support (Grant)
* Tulip driver
* LASI Apricot ethernet (Sammy)
* IP checksum code in C (Thomas)
* console termios setup (Martin)
* Moved to Kernel 2.3.42

Userland

* Sash 3.4 works (Matthew)
* ifconf (Matthew)
* httpd (Josh)

= Year 2001 =

'''February 28, 2001'''

Kernel

* rewrite semaphores -- both read/write and ordinary (Matthew)
* Create an IO tree to support multiple I/O MMUs. ([mailto:rbradetich@uswest.net Ryan])
* SuperIO Serial ([mailto:mkp@mkp.net Martin Petersen] and Alex deVries)
* fix fbcon-sti.c bugs and X11? ([mailto:dhd@puffin.external.hp.com David])
* Kernel Memory dumps on crash. See [http://oss.sgi.com/projects/lkcd/ SGI's LKCD]. ([mailto:bruno_vidal@hpfrcu03.france.hp.com Bruno Vidal?])
* HIL keyboard driver needs updating ([mailto:bri@mojo.calyx.net Brian] and [mailto:alex@linuxcare.com Alex] has access to HIL documentation)
* Coalesce DMA pages in sba_map_sg() ([mailto:grundler@puffin.external.hp.com Grant])
* Coalesce DMA pages in ccio_map_sg() ([mailto:rbradetich@uswest.net Ryan])
* LASI Floppy controller ([mailto:dkennedy@linuxcare.com Dave Kennedy])
* WAX EISA bus addapter ([mailto:alex@linuxcare.com Alex deVries])
* Harmony audio driver completion ([mailto:alex@linuxcare.com Alex deVries])
* AD1889 PCI Audio driver ([mailto:alex@linuxcare.com Alex deVries])
* SMP support
** build/test w/CONFIG_SMP ([mailto:ggg@cup.hp.com ggg])
** Interrupt Distribution (even CPU loading) w/CONFIG_SMP ([mailto:ggg@cup.hp.com ggg])
** asm-parisc/cache.h defines L1_CACHE_BYTES - issue w/32-bit on PA2.0 ([mailto:ggg@cup.hp.com ggg])
* 64-bit kernel
** VM ([mailto:john_marvin@hp.com John])
** PA2.0 Hand-Tuned/Optimised asm IP checksum code ([mailto:tausq@tausq.org Randolph])
** Syscalls/ioctl ([mailto:john_marvin@hp.com John], [mailto:bame@puffin.external.hp.com Paul], George, Ringo, '''''Cast of Thousands''''')
** defconfig and friends
** check/fix sim700 driver compile warnings (needed to support Cxxx boxes in wide mode, if we ever want to) ([mailto:rbradetich@uswest.net Ryan])
** 64-to-32-bit translator for PDC firmware calls on Cxxx boxen (enable more people to test wide kernels) ([mailto:rbradetich@uswest.net Ryan])
** Change 'unsigned long sversion:28' to unsigned int in hardware.h? <br />Change hardware.c functions which take hversion/sversion args?
** Do the right thing with macro elf_check_arch() for wide/narrow kernels (see include/asm-parisc/elf.h)
** Fix 'hwclock' problem (probably a broken or missing ioctl32.c translation).
* Kernel debugger - KWDB ([mailto:grundler@puffin.external.hp.com Grant])
* Fix cache/TLB flushing. ([mailto:john_marvin@hp.com John])
* Finish ptrace(2) implementation. ([mailto:tsbogend@alpha.franken.de Thomas])
* Unaligned trap handler. ([mailto:Volunteer Volunteer?])
* Finish floating point completion and trap handler. ([mailto:Volunteer Volunteer?])
* Verify floating point trap behaviour is correct ([mailto:Volunteer Volunteer?])
* Remove kbd_read_status() dependency on CONFIG_GSC_PS2. ([mailto:Volunteer Volunteer?])
* &lt;include/asm-parisc/types.h&gt; defines dma_addr_t as 32-bit. PCI/Elroy supports 64-bit. "typedef ulong_t dma_addr_t"? ([mailto:Volunteer Volunteer?])
* Update Documentation/parisc/registers ([mailto:Volunteer Volunteer?])
* PA1.1 SR can be 16-32 bits wide - only using 16-bits. ([mailto:Volunteer Volunteer?])
* rewrite kernel_thread ([mailto:matthew@wil.cx Matthew])
* Dino/100BT: Use "Good Dog" Timer to limit GSC bus tenancy instead of limiting tulip DMA burst length. ([mailto:Volunteer Volunteer?]) <br /> (JSM has tried this - it didn't work. GGG thinks it should.)
* remove asm-parisc/real.h fixing dependencies on it
* Verify and fix the existing code in led.c for LCD displays ([mailto:Volunteer Volunteer?])

Userland:

* Test/Debug floating point environment support in GNU libc. ([mailto:Volunteer Volunteer?])
* Debug floating point environment and trap handling. ([mailto:Volunteer Volunteer?])
* Write open version of required 64-bit libmilli routines. ([mailto:Volunteer Volunteer?])