---
title: Time64
---

== Upgrading system to latest debian-ports binaries ==

Some hints when upgrading from an older version to the time64-enabled binaries.

# run apt-update 
# run apt install debian-archive-keyring debian-keyring debian-ports-archive-keyring palo
# install latest stable kernel, reboot
# I had to drop all "db" entries in /etc/nsswitch.conf, otherwise I got crashes in apt/dpkg from libdb-5.3.so:
 BDB0588 At least one secondary cursor must be specified to DB->join#
# After upgrade I had to reinstall lots of programs, specifically:
 moreutils mc ifupdown mailutils task-ssh-server

== Thoughts during debian's time64 transition ==

* gstreamer
Use 1.22. It seems the actual versions have to match.  I also edited the version info gstreamer1.0 (meson.build and gstreamer.doap) so version in pkgconfig file is 1.24.0.
Besides the gst packages, we also need an old version of webkit2gtk.  The latest version depends on features added in gstreamer 1.24.

I'm having to work around issues caused by lack of clang and rust compilers.  A few packages now need 64-bit.

The hard part has been setting up and maintaining chroot.  I need wxwidgets3.2 and webkit2gtk builds to complete transition for giant ffmpeg dependency loop.  Then, I should be able to an apt upgrade for chroot.
These are the packages that I have or will do manual builds in chroot:
gnuplot hdf5 libnsl vtk9 dbus-c++  gst-plugins-bad1.0 ibus librsvg webkit2gtk
gst-plugins-base1.0 imagemagick libtirpc weston efl gst-plugins-good1.0 leptonlib
pmix wxwidgets3.2 ffmpeg gstreamer1.0 libcroco poppler

The gst* and  webkit2gtk sources are from trixie.  They are last versions that built on hppa.  I just did +b1 uploads for them. We can add wpewebkit to the list whose version has to match gstreamer1.0 version.
Build of wpewebkit failed for same reason as webkit2gtk.

librsvg is last version that built on hppa.  Same for libcroco. libcroco packages have been deleted from debian archive.  However librsvg lib depends on libcroco lib.

I can details of versions for other packages.  Some needed +b1 rebuilds of last versions that built.  Others, just needed to be built in chroot to fix dependencies.

Current version of gnuplot needs wxwidgets3.2.  Maybe it will build after we get build of it.
Testsuite just failed...  I have been ignoring testsuite issues.

* A few packages now need 64-bit.
There was a discussion about some packages dropping 32-bit. But that was scientfic libs and such: https://lists.debian.org/debian-devel/2024/04/msg00353.html
pmix now is only 64-bit.  I used 5.0.1-4. openmpi lib depends on libpmix2t64.  So, this not just scientific.

I'm trying to build webkit2gtk_2.42.5-1.  First build failed due this bug:
https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=1066454

From what I read, there are other serious bugs in this version. Also t64 renaming hasn't
been done in this version.


I'm trying to build webkit2gtk_2.42.5-1.  First build failed due this bug:
https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=1066454
From what I read, there are other serious bugs in this version. Also t64 renaming hasn't
been done in this version.
I think we need to see if we can remove the rust dependencies in the current version of
gstreamer1.0 on hppa and then update to the current versions of the gst and webkit sources.
Filed a gstreamer bug:
https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=1069625