---
title: TODO
---

= PA-RISC Linux TODO =

== Status & TODO 2023-07-28 ==
* graphics mmap: Make mapping aliasing physical memory.
* DONE: kernel: drop chassis_power_off() and switch to register_sys_off_handler() - https://patchwork.kernel.org/project/linux-parisc/patch/20230812203759.395651-1-deller@gmx.de/
* DONE: kernel: drop arch/parisc/kernel/pa7300lc.c
* QEMU: drop cpu load on panic -> implement panic_smp_self_stop() [stop cpu] and panic_blink() to sleep CPU
* Unalgned handler, emulate_std() -> clean up assembly, use LR on 32-bit...( %L1, %R1 for register #1)
* MOSTLY DONE: Fix kernel 6.4 boot crash -> https://patchwork.kernel.org/project/linux-parisc/patch/20230803062404.2373480-1-rppt@kernel.org/
* DONE: matoro - ia64 io_uring: https://lore.kernel.org/io-uring/27b05e18b406621584b29653e5aafd43@matoro.tk/T/#t
* ONGOING: qemu-user brk() fixes: https://lists.nongnu.org/archive/html/qemu-devel/2023-07/msg04657.html
* STARTED: Add BPF assembler implementation -> https://github.com/hdeller/linux/tree/for-next-bpf-jit6
* check qemu-user build errors:
** libtool: Dynamic ltdl runtime loading failure
** STARTED: kronosnet - port SCTP to qemu
** libtool FTBFS, Dynamic ltdl runtime loading, https://buildd.debian.org/status/fetch.php?pkg=libtool&arch=hppa&ver=2.4.7-7&stamp=1691050219&raw=0
** check vnlog: very easy testcase for clone/fork issue, see mail 07-31-2023.
** qemu brk testcases:
*** https://lore.kernel.org/qemu-devel/CACPK8XeyqcEDyyL3Jw2WYWs_gGdtTCf2=Ly04CMgkshSMdj7RA@mail.gmail.com/#t (armhf binary on a ppc64le host)
*** brk testcase in qemu commit: 4d1de87c75007ee7e29dd271ebb4afdcf01ad7aa
*** fstype testcase, static armhf
** https://buildd.debian.org/status/fetch.php?pkg=qtwebsockets-opensource-src&arch=hppa&ver=5.15.10-2&stamp=1688842351&raw=0
** DONE: https://buildd.debian.org/status/logs.php?pkg=dbus&ver=1.14.8-2&arch=hppa
** DONE: yt (qemu memory issue), dlt-daemon (port 8080 used by machine)
* ask to get palo-installer, partman-palo, aboot-installer into debian-installer (import from old Git-Backup, Alex Wirt?) - Mail from Adrian 05/30/23
* DONE: fix strace in debian: https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=1030587 -> ask to switch to v6.4 instead
* DONE push fbcon-64-bit-sti patches upstream: https://github.com/hdeller/linux/commits/drm-misc-next-with-64bit-console-final
* STARTED: Add cacheflush(2) syscall (like ARC, CSKY, MIPS, and NIOS2), add to glibc, gcc and update man-pages
* STARTED: push visualizefx driver
* MOSTLY DONE: why doesn't kernel >= 6.1.5 boot on panama? -> But boots with "no-alternatives" boot option!
** DONE/Reason: flush_dcache_page() re-enables the IRQs which leads to the spinlock hang in aio_complete() https://lore.kernel.org/linux-parisc/ZGyawdtBhNnvvTv3@shell.armlinux.org.uk/T/#m96bc8e874d76b3b7bab8b40954b68e6cfb81ee2b
** DONE: backport patch to kernels < 5.18, mail sent to stable mailing list
** have the arm and nios2 patches been picked up?
* DONE: Apply missing qemu patches: https://gitlab.com/laurent_vivier/qemu/-/commits/linux-user-for-8.0
* DONE: mariadb fails with io_uring, testcase https://github.com/axboe/liburing/blob/master/examples/io_uring-test.c fails too. (Jens bought a C3000 workstation and added it to the machine test pool.)
* QEMU/Kernel: Add CONFIG_NO_HZ to speed up qemu
* QEMU/Kernel: Add diag() calls to emulate & speed up xchg() and cmp_xchg() 
* glibc:
** STARTED: Finfish MADV transition in glibc: glibc: https://sourceware.org/pipermail/libc-alpha/2023-February/145452.html , dietlibc: https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=1030998
** Add backtrace() function to glibc -> needed to build dovecot package
* DONE: Improve text on https://www.openpa.net
* Debian:
** STARTED: Fix initramfs: Bug#1027915: systemd requires /run to be mounted with a minimum size of 20MB: https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=1027915,   patch sent
** STARTED: port [[Gccgo_for_hppa]] gccgo -> https://github.com/hdeller/gcc/tree/gccgo-hppa
* STARTED: Activate LARGE FILE SUPPORT generally on hppa: https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=1020335
* QEMU issues:
** devscripts FTBFS because of subversion: svnadmin: E000072: Can't check directory '.': Value too large for defined data type
** rrdtool FTBFS on 32-bit arches: https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=1026973
** ohcount and guile-ssh: ftbfs with qemu but built okay on real hardware: https://buildd.debian.org/status/logs.php?pkg=guile-ssh&arch=hppa and https://buildd.debian.org/status/logs.php?pkg=ohcount&ver=4.0.0-3&arch=hppa
** fix openvswitch on qemu
** DONE: indent FTBFS on qemu: https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=1029574 (shebang bug)
** DONE: cfengine3 FTBFS on qemu: https://buildd.debian.org/status/logs.php?pkg=cfengine3&arch=hppa
** DONE: qcoro FTBFS on qemu -> Fix: CLONE_PIDFD flag not handled by clone() emulation: patch sent 
** QEMU: Improve emulation speed on full virtualization
** check glibc tst-pthread-timedlock-lockloop testcase failure (The futex facility returned an unexpected error code., xclock_gettime.c:29: clock_gettime (0): Unknown error -1)
* gcc compiler:
** Why is compiling fife so slow with cc1plus?
** asked Dave to implement gcc builtins for break asms, like on other platforms, for usage in kernel
* QEMU: Implement 32/24 bit HCRX graphics
* QEMU: Add support for running MPE with https://www.openpa.net (& Craig Lalley <mr_lalley@yahoo.com>)
* stifb: Fix HCRX text scrolling, missing functions?  - see latest patches to stifb
* Implement TLB lazy_mmu_mode, see include/linux/pgtable.h and search for arch_leave_lazy_mmu_mode
* Enhance vDSO: gettimeofday(), getcpu(),... see e.g.c32c47aa364096124c9c69c1a44918433832562b
* [[VDSO]] - Review gettimeofday and clock_gettime() implementation, possibly use a light-weight-syscall and rely on cr16 and cpu speed for more accurate timing? 
* SeaBIOS and palo: muldi3 and divdi3 (from libgcc.a) trashes fr22-fr25 because of xmpyu instruction. Doesn't seem to have negative effect, but those registers should better be saved/restored in pdc_entry() and iodc_entry(), or libgcc should be fixed to not use floating point instructions.
* STARTED: Port grub2 to hppa? -> https://github.com/hdeller/grub
* STARTED: [https://patchwork.kernel.org/project/linux-parisc/patch/20211031204952.25678-2-svens@stackframe.org/ Visualize FX framebuffer/DRM support (by Sven Schnelle)]
* Implement ARCH_WANT_DEFAULT_TOPDOWN_MMAP_LAYOUT : https://lwn.net/ml/linux-kernel/20190724055850.6232-14-alex@ghiti.fr/
* STARTED: improve unaligned handlers, e.g. to use get_user/put_user inline asm
* Fix kernel: make ARCH=parisc tools/perf
* trace irq flags - http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=24131a61ec8c2d83431cb818281d3c9db986ab08
* Add core-objtool for parisc - http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=26660a4046b171a752e72a1dd32153230234fe3a
* ONGOING: Enable UBSAN and fix fallouts* Enable BlockTLB on PA1.x for STI framebuffer (see block tlb info in sti.pdf documentation) and ftp://parisc.parisc-linux.org/docs/pdc32.pdf
* Enable SPARSEMEM_VMEMMAP_ENABLE
* STARTED: implement CONFIG_VMAP_STACK "virtually mapped stacks and thread_info cleanup" (see arm) -> https://lwn.net/Articles/693026/
* convert irq handling to use CONFIG_IRQ_DOMAIN_HIERARCHY (serial port problem, action handler msising when registering irq)
* check usage of CONFIG_MLONGCALLS, only 14MB/s with debian kernel and dd if=/dev/zero of=here bs=1k count=100000  ?
* NO_IRQ -> should be converted to (0) instead of (-1) -> Helge (check assembly, check in drivers/parisc/*)
* check assembly in drivers/parisc/*
* INEQUIVALENT ALIASES occur building gnuradio on debian.
* STARTED by Sven: Fix kexec on PA8800/PA8900 CPUs: how to restart the CPUs on these systems?
* Add Linux kernel PIM driver - /sys/firmware/pim/*
* parisc timers: convert to generic clockevent (Arnd Bergmann) - https://patchwork.kernel.org/project/linux-parisc/patch/20201008154651.1901126-14-arnd@arndb.de/
* STARTED: convert old-style rtc driver drivers/input/misc/hp_sdc_rtc.c to new RTC model, remove the procfs and miscdevice interfaces first and replace the ioctl with a struct rtc_class_ops. Arnd Bergmann can review those patches, but Alexandre and Alessandro are the ones who would merge them once the driver is moved to drivers/rtc. (Mail from Arnd Bergmann, 28.04.2016) - see https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/10701397/
* Add some cond_resched() calls to avoid RCU stalls, see commit 2a8bc5316adc998951e8f726c31e231a6021eae2
* Check if https://lkml.org/lkml/2020/7/23/1246 was added to avoid TLB stalls (commits https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c6fe44d96fc1536af5b11cd859686453d1b7bfd1 and https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=2a9127fcf2296674d58024f83981f40b128fffea) - kernel v5.9 seems good.
* '''QEMU Full-system emulation'''
** Mark Cave-Ayland <mark.cave-ayland@ilande.co.uk> offers to do contract work for QEMU through his company.
** Fix migration of VMs (noticed by: Mark Cave-Ayland <mark.cave-ayland@ilande.co.uk>):  Boot a qcow2 image in QEMU using the GTK, Wait a random time anywhere between 5-20s, Pause the VM, Switch to the "monitor" tab, Run "savevm foo" to save the current VM state as "foo", Type "quit" to exit QEMU, Add "-loadvm foo" to your QEMU command line and launch QEMU, Unpause the VM 
** Check "HPPA support for IGNITE-UX install discs" for HP Logic Analyzer 16700A (Mail from Keith Monahan <keith@techtravels.org> Sept 2020)
** STARTED: Finish LASI and 82596 NIC for QEMU -> https://github.com/hdeller/qemu-hppa/commits/lasi
*** ncr53c710 driver from amiga: https://github.com/tonioni/WinUAE/blob/master/qemuvga/lsi53c710.cpp
* '''QEMU User-mode emulation'''
** Implement io_submit() syscalls, probably not possible. Check why raft package testcases which fail
** check why qgis, plasma-framework,  kio-extras and fcitx5-chinese-addons fail to build with "Illegal instruction" error (https://buildd.debian.org/status/fetch.php?pkg=qgis&arch=hppa&ver=3.22.4%2Bdfsg-3&stamp=1645691873&raw=0)
** qemu and executable stack: The following error occurred on pacific in mlton build: /usr/lib/mlton/mlton-compile: error while loading shared libraries: libm.so.6: cannot enable executable stack as shared object requires: Invalid argument
** More exec stack errors: openssh, lnav
** It looks like haskell packages still fail on qemu (e.g., haskell-swish).
* '''JAVA'''
** Finish OpenJDK, see patch and mail from Adrian Glaubitz 05.02.2021.
** IMPORTANT: fix OpenJDK - fixes required in zeroport (stack grows up!).
* '''Rust language''' (STARTED: https://github.com/rust-lang/libc/compare/master...hdeller:libc:hppa-devel2)
**From Adrian Glaubitz (9/29/2021): The Rust project merged a change [1] that allows rustc to use GCC instead of LLVM as codegen backend for generating machine code through libgccjit. This means that we are in principal able now to build Rust code for all the architectures that GCC support but LLVM doesn't, which includes hppa. Please see this [2] and this [3] comment to see how to get started with cross-building the Rust compiler for a new target using libgccjit. We will have to add these new architectures to the libc crate first, see an example PR for that here [4]. Since I can't work on all these targets myself, I wanted to ask you to help me and get the support for hppa added to libc and rustc where necessary.
*** [1] https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/87260
*** [2] https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/87260#issuecomment-930221503
*** [3] https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/87260#issuecomment-930223504
*** [4] https://github.com/rust-lang/libc/pull/2414
* '''gcc compiler'''
** _mcount can be optimized (smaller) by not subtracting offset)
** check if we can use -fentry from gcc for _mcount optimization
** put PLABELS into read-only section (gcc function pa_reloc_rw_mask() needs modification, see "section mismatches" mails, 11.09.2017)
** gcc: Add _builtin_thread_pointer() and _builtin_set_thread_pointer(), e.g.: https://gcc.gnu.org/ml/gcc-patches/2012-07/msg00428.html   for glibc: ports/sysdeps/hppa/nptl/tls.h __set_cr27()
** STARTED: why is GNU AS so slow, e.g. when building freeorion, quantlib-swig or yade packages, testcases: openturns
*** http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=787192
*** https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=18427
** provide libphobos packages - gcc-defaults - http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=763103,  Work by Dave: https://gcc.gnu.org/ml/gcc-testresults/2018-11/msg03460.html
** gcc -> join 32- and 64bit compiler, make "-m64" work, get rid of hppa64-linux-gnu-gcc
* '''64-bit userspace support (from Dave Anglin, Nick Hudson)'''
** 64-bit userspace, [[Binutils]] 64-bit binutils needs to be fixed to get multiple stub section support.
** glibc port (hppa64 can use the generic thread code)
** 64-bit support in gcc is probably pretty good as 64-bit HP-UX works fine.
** gdb could be a problem due to a lack of a maintainer.

* debian parisc perl bug (http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=721537) shows that mmap on parisc linux is horribly inefficient.  We allocate huge maps for small files. This should be improved. Mailthread: " parisc mmap: private file maps" ,http://www.spinics.net/lists/linux-parisc/msg05083.html  or  https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=119567  https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=119567 
* kernel work
** ALPHA processor port:
*** Add https://lkml.org/lkml/2007/8/14/259 aboot patch
*** New one: https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/10141217/ (alpha: fix crash if pthread_create races with signal delivery)
*** Kernel patches: http://marc.info/?t=140610652200001&r=1&w=2, The proposed fix is in: http://marc.info/?t=140675670100010&r=1&w=2, http://marc.info/?t=142327510200001&r=1&w=2, 
*** alpha qemu-user bug: https://gitlab.com/qemu-project/qemu/-/issues/494
** 3.14 partly: return ((unsigned long) mapping >> 7) & ((SHMLBA >> PAGE_SHIFT) - 1); in arch/parisc/kernel/sys_parisc.c
* How to upgrade libgcc:
** apt install -f -o Dpkg::Options::="--force-overwrite"
** see: https://raphaelhertzog.com/2011/08/01/understanding-dpkgs-file-overwrite-error/

* Kernel: Hard to solve outstanding issues
** megaraid on my rp5470 hangs at boot (maybe because SCSI chassis not connected)? -> use new megaraid driver for debian -> maybe patch https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/7738911/ needed to enable PCI-PCI bridge?
** Fix FireGL X1/X3 in C8000 - currently broken (no DRM and software accel is incredibly slow <strike>plus colors in 24bpp mode are wrong</strike> seems ok in debian 8 sid / 3.16.7 kernel) - Info: manual "Radeon R5xx Acceleration" - http://www.x.org/docs/AMD/R5xx_Acceleration_v1.1.pdf  and generic: http://www.botchco.com/agd5f/?p=50 

* Kernel: still missing Linux kernel development (no patches available yet or maybe not possible to implement):
** maybe: optimize flush_dcache_page() implementation like sparc. See Documentation/cachetlb.txt, e.g. used in aio subsystem
** maybe implement transparent huge pages (due to cache coherency technically only possible on PA8500-PA8700 CPUs, not possible on PA8800-PA8900 CPUs)
** implement BUG() and WARN() with inline assembly so that interrupt happens in delay branch of "or,<> %r0,cond,%r0". Probably not possible, because gcc will report "control reaches end of non-void function" warnings/errors.
** disable FP-register save/restore at kernel entry? - https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/3975291/
** enable 16k/64k kernel page sizes (still cacheflushing-issues with SCSI driver, additional work in glibc needed to deal with >4k page size, e.g. ld-loader alignments of data/code segments)
** Superdome support - can someone test? Should work better now with latest kernels (maybe ask Dennis Clarke <dclarke@blastwave.org>, Jan 2019).

* Debian packages / Userspace work
** teach "blkid" about palo partition
** glibc: add backtrace() function, problems when building elfutils package: http://buildd.debian-ports.org/status/package.php?p=elfutils&suite=sid and dovecot https://buildd.debian.org/status/fetch.php?pkg=dovecot&arch=hppa&ver=1%3A2.3.19.1%2Bdfsg1-2%2Bb1&stamp=1666756774&raw=0
** Circular dependency problems with kde packages caused by vlc and ffmpeg (Dave)
*** Solution: Rebuild ffmpeg outside the buildd (as some dependencies have probably been deleted) and upload a +b1 version. Then trigger bin-nmu of phonon package. Finally this resolves then the dependencies of vlc, ffmpeg, phonon, chromaprint, polkit-kde-agent-1, kwrited, kwallet-kf5 and  libkf5notifications-dev...
** Due to very bad performance running multiple copies of dot program (Dave)
*** In vtk6 debian package, adding DOT_NUM_THREADS = 1 helps.

* Floating point NaN (see: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NaN)
** PA-RISC uses "mips" NaN format which differs from x86, etc. It should be called PA-RISC format as I think PA was first.  The quiet NaN bit is opposite to than in current IEEE standard. 
** Debian packages with NaN issues: libime, [https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=781787 capnproto]
   
* palo (PA-RISC Boot Loader):
** PALO - add regular rewind & load to avoid tftp boot timing issues. See mail from Frank Schreiner "PALO issues" (Dec 2018).
** When listing directory contents, resolve and print symlink target file names too, e.g. "vmlinux -> linux-5.12.1-64bit".
** Fix palo deb package to build iplboot natively (https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=851792)
** Modify (if possible), that palo can read (sequential) tftpbootable-vmlinuxes as well as the current boot-vmlinux images (simplifies build/handling)

== Upstream PA-RISC-related kernel patch history ==
* Kernel 3.8:
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=4f4ffc3a5398ef9bdbb32db04756d7d34e356fcf unbreak automounter support on 64-bit kernel with 32-bit userspace]
* Kernel 3.9:
** Integrate Dave Anglin's latest cacheflush patchset (fixes unusual userspace crashes) https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2480891/ - Dave 
** add ucmpdi2() symbol to kernel - https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2468471/ - Dave
** patch to disable -mlong-calls compiler option when building kernel modules - https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2480001/
** James Bottomley's explanation of kernel gateway page - in 3.10
** lib/atomic64_test.c:131:2: warning: #warning Please implement atomic64_dec_if_positive for your architecture - in 3.10
** add interrupt statistics like x86 to /proc/interrupts - in 3.10
** kernel"-crashes in the area of do_softirq() - irq stacks implemented: https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2497501/
** test/build kernel with allmodconfig/allyesconfig
** error in lib/mpi/longlong.h,umul_ppmm() uses floating point -> https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2521621/
** update MAINTAINERS file, git tree -> https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2580161/
** lockdep issues with irqstack patch in UP configurations. Fixed -> https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2589321/
** add /proc/interrupt counters for floating point assist and unaligned handler traps -> https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2589161
** CONFIG_PREEMPT works now -> https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2624241/
** parisc: make default cross compiler search more robust (v3)
** parisc: fix SMP races when updating PTE and TLB entries in entry.S
** parisc: use long branch in fork_like macro
** parisc: only re-enable interrupts if we need to schedule or deliver signals when returning to userspace
* Kernel 3.10
** stifb broken (PCI broken?) -> https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2636821/ -> 3.10-rc4
** parport hangs / lp -> https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2638331/ -> 3.10-rc4
** MAINTAINERS update -> https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2636601/ -> 3.10-rc4
* Kernel 3.11:
** parport (lp) fix
** defaultconfig for C8000
** C8000 workstation support in 3.11 and 3.10.X stable (serial port irq, IOMMU range fixes, FireGL radeon AGP fix, vma memory fix)
** remove arch/parisc/kernel/sys32.h
** pa_memcpy() was broken on 64bit (due to gcc miscompiling nonstandard C-code)
* Kernel 3.12:
** Fix 64bit SMP kernel on HP Visualize J-6750, 32bit SMP does work (Machine owners: Dave Land, Domenico Andreoli) -> fixed in 3.12 and backported >= kernel 2.6.12 (http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=54e181e073fc1415e41917d725ebdbd7de956455)
** fix kernel crash when running "echo t > /proc/sysrq-trigger" http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=59b33f148cc08fb33cbe823fca1e34f7f023765e
** regenerate defconfigs to include CONFIG_DEVTMPFS=y and CONFIG_DEVTMPFS_MOUNT=y to avoid udev/initrd problems. Done. http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c1b14041aa86800cfd9e21b280b0eaee885fa623
** IMPI/BMC patch from Thomas Bogendoerfer - http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=fdbeb7de700a3c8fc85d7e595a6bf1c92a27c0a1 - test with: "ipmitool sdr"
* Kernel 3.13
** STIcon broken on 64bit with > 4GB RAM - https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/3149621/
** New defaultconfigs for 32- and 64-bit - https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/2825923/, enabled BMC IPMI & disabled HP SDC for 64bit
** implement audit functionality, https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/3046731/
** avoid dependencies on bzimage during make install, https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/3069691/
** exception table entries can be of type int (32bit), even on 64bit kernel -> saves space. - https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/3033801/
* Kernel 3.14
** Native types in uapi/asm/stat.h
** '''Dropped HP-UX Support: changed EWOULDBLOCK = EAGAIN -> https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/3499551/''' (important ABI change!)
** parisc: Make EWOULDBLOCK be equal to EAGAIN on parisc
** sticon font problem fixed, sticon now automatically chooses the Linux fb fonts if available instead of using the HP fonts
** '''parisc: add flexible mmap memory layout support'''
** parisc: convert uapi/asm/stat.h to use native types only
** parisc: wire up sched_setattr and sched_getattr
** parisc: fix cache-flushing
* Kernel 3.15
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=ab3e55b119c9653b19ea4edffb86f04db867ac98 epoll_pwait bug: debian packages libio-epoll-perl and python-falcon failed]
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b5f3c61d06165c3dddddbc30772f079c2c8589ca pthread_create() out-of-memory bug, failed only when used with GNU make, e.g. zeromq3 package. Reason: stack hard limit problems]
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=0ef36bd2b37815719e31a72d2beecc28ca8ecd26 parisc: change value of SHMLBA from 0x00400000 to PAGE_SIZE] (backported to v3.13+)
** parisc: add renameat2 syscall
** parisc: Improve LWS-CAS performance
** parisc: ratelimit userspace segfault printing
** parisc: Use generic uapi/asm/resource.h file
** parisc: remove _STK_LIM_MAX override
** parisc: fix epoll_pwait syscall on compat kernel
** parisc: change value of SHMLBA from 0x00400000 to PAGE_SIZE
** parisc: Replace __get_cpu_var uses for address calculation
** parisc: locks: remove redundant arch_*_relax operations
** parisc: wire up sys_utimes
** parisc: Remove unused CONFIG_PARISC_TMPALIAS code
* Kernel 3.16
** parisc: Eliminate memset after alloc_bootmem_pages
** parisc: Remove SA_RESTORER define
** parisc: drop unused defines and header includes
** parisc: fix fanotify_mark() syscall on 32bit compat kernel
** parisc: add serial ports of C8000/1GHz machine to hardware database
* Kernel 3.17
** parisc: Fix serial console for machines with serial port on superio chip
** parisc: Only use -mfast-indirect-calls option for 32-bit kernel builds
** parisc: pdc_stable.c: Avoid potential stack overflows
** parisc: pdc_stable.c: Cleaning up unnecessary use of memset in conjunction with strncpy
** parisc: ptrace: use secure_computing_strict()
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=89206491201cbd1571009b36292af781cef74c1b parisc: Implement new LWS CAS supporting 64 bit operations, CAS implementation: implement 1,2,4 and 8 byte CAS]  (backported to v3.13+) 
** parisc: Wire up seccomp, getrandom and memfd_create syscalls
** parisc: dino: fix %d confusingly prefixed with 0x in format string
** parisc: sys_hpux: NUL terminator is one past the end
** parisc: Use get_signal() signal_setup_done()
* Kernel 3.18
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=1f25df2eff5b25f52c139d3ff31bc883eee9a0ab '''parisc: Reduce SIGRTMIN from 37 to 32 to behave like other Linux architectures'''] (important ABI change!)
** parisc: Avoid using CONFIG_64BIT in userspace exported headers      
** parisc: Use compat layer for msgctl, shmat, shmctl and semtimedop syscalls (backported to v3.10+)
** parisc: Use BUILD_BUG() instead of undefined functions
** parisc: Wire up bpf syscall
* Kernel 3.19
** parisc: fix out-of-register compiler error in ldcw inline assembler function
* Kernel 4.0
** parisc: Wire up execveat syscall
** parisc: Add error checks when building up signal trampoline handler
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=04c1614977168fb8f002e2d81f704eeabe0c5ebd '''parisc: hpux - Drop support for HP-UX binaries''']
** parisc: hpux - Do not compile hpux subdirectory
** parisc: hpux - Delete files in hpux subdirectory
** parisc: hpux - Remove hpux gateway page
** parisc: hpux - Remove HPUX syscall numbers
** fs/binfmt_som: Drop kernel support for HP-UX SOM binaries
** parisc/uaccess: fix sparse errors
** parisc: macro whitespace fixes
** parisc: Add compile-time check when adding new syscalls
** parisc: Fix pmd code to depend on PT_NLEVELS value, not on CONFIG_64BIT
** parisc: mm: don't count preallocated pmds
* Kernel 4.1
** parisc: Replace PT_NLEVELS with CONFIG_PGTABLE_LEVELS
** parisc: Eliminate sg_virt_addr() and private scatterlist.h
** parisc: copy_thread(): rename 'arg' argument to 'kthread_arg'
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d045c77c1a69703143a36169c224429c48b9eecd '''parisc,metag: Fix crashes due to stack randomization on stack-grows-upwards architectures''']  (backported to v3.16+)
*** DONE: fix VA randomization regarding to stack limits (testcase: ocaml build, temporarily fix: echo 0 > /proc/sys/kernel/randomize_va_space or add to /etc/sysctl.conf: sys.kernel.randomize_va_space = 0)
** parisc: %pf is only for function pointers
** parisc: copy_thread(): rename 'arg' argument to 'kthread_arg'
* Kernel 4.2
** parisc: don't use module_init for non-modular core pdc_cons code
** parisc: use for_each_sg()
** stifb: Implement hardware accelerated copyarea
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=01ab60570427caa24b9debc369e452e86cd9beb4 parisc: Fix some PTE/TLB race conditions and optimize __flush_tlb_range based on timing results] (backported to v3.18+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=4c4ac9a48ac512c6b5a6cca06cfad2ad96e8caaa '''parisc: mm: Fix a memory leak related to pmd not attached to the pgd'''] (backported to v4.0+)
* Kernel 4.3
** parisc: Define ioremap_uc and ioremap_wc
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e02a653e15d8d32e9e768fd99a3271aafe5c5d77 '''PCI,parisc: Enable 64-bit bus addresses on PA-RISC''']
** parisc: Additionally check for in_atomic() in page fault handler
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b1b4e435e4ef7de77f07bf2a42c8380b960c2d44 '''parisc: Filter out spurious interrupts in PA-RISC irq handler'''] - fixes crashes due to serial ports at boot on C8000 with PA8900 CPUs (backported to all) 
** parisc: Drop CONFIG_SMP around update_cr16_clocksource()
** parisc: Use platform_device_register_simple("rtc-generic")
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=1b59ddfcf1678de38a1f8ca9fb8ea5eebeff1843 '''parisc: Use double word condition in 64bit CAS operation'''] - fixes 64bit gcc builtin atomics (backported to all)
* Kernel 4.4
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=a01fece2e4185ac173abd16d10304d73d47ebf00 parisc: Change L1_CACHE_BYTES to 16]
** net/xps: Fix calculation of initial number of xps queues
** parisc: reduce syslog debug output
** parisc: serial/mux: Convert to uart_console_device instead of open-coded
** parisc: Wire up userfaultfd syscall
** parisc: allocate sys_membarrier system call number
** parisc: Drop hpux_stat64 struct from stat.h header file
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d0cf62fb63f760e98244d31396b3b58f3a1e326b '''parisc: Fixes and cleanups in kernel uapi header files'''] (backported to 3.18+)
** parisc: Fix wrong comment regarding first pmd entry flags
** parisc: Drop definition of start_thread_som for HP-UX SOM binaries
** parisc: Drop unused MADV_xxxK_PAGES flags from asm/mman.h
** '''parisc: Add defines for Huge page support'''
** parisc: Initialize the fault vector earlier in the boot process.
** parisc: Increase initial kernel mapping to 32MB on 64bit kernel
** parisc: Use long branch to do_syscall_trace_exit
** '''parisc: Add Huge Page and HUGETLBFS support'''
** parisc: Map kernel text and data on huge pages
** parisc: Remove unused pcibios_init_bus()
** parisc: Wire up mlock2 syscall
** parisc: Disable huge pages on Mako machines
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e46e31a3696ae2d66f32c207df3969613726e636 '''parisc iommu: fix panic due to trying to allocate too large region'''] (backported to all)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=71a71fb5374a23be36a91981b5614590b9e722c3 '''parisc: Fix syscall restarts'''] (backported to all)
* Kernel 4.5
** parisc: Protect huge page pte changes with spinlocks 
** parisc: Imporove debug info about space registers and TLB configuration
** parisc: Drop parisc-specific NSIGTRAP define
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e60fc5aa608eb38b47ba4ee058f306f739eb70a0 '''parisc: Fix __ARCH_SI_PREAMBLE_SIZE'''] (backported to all)
** parisc: Reduce overhead of parisc_requires_coherency()
** parisc: Initialize PCI bridge cache line and default latency  (related to https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/7738911/)
** parisc: Use parentheses around expression in floppy.h
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=98e8b6c9ac9d1b1e9d1122dfa6783d5d566bb8f7 '''parisc: Fix ptrace syscall number and return value modification'''] (backported to v4.0+)
** parisc: Wire up copy_file_range syscall
* Kernel 4.6
** parisc: Panic immediately when panic_on_oops
** parisc: Drop alloc_hugepages and free_hugepages syscalls
** parisc,metag: Implement CONFIG_DEBUG_STACK_USAGE option
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=0de798584bdedfdad19db21e3c7aec84f252f4f3 parisc: Use generic extable search and sort routines]
** parisc: Wire up preadv2 and pwritev2 syscalls
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=4f4acc9472e54ce702f1d85fc9e6d57767dec91f parisc: Fix SIGSYS signals in compat case] (backported to v4.5)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=910cd32e552ea09caa89cdbe328e468979b030dd parisc: Fix and enable seccomp filter support] (backported to v4.5)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=592570c950fb455226cd255603de7cede2be83e6 parisc: Handle R_PARISC_PCREL32 relocations in kernel modules]
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e3893027a300927049efc1572f852201eb785142 '''parisc: Avoid function pointers for kernel exception routines'''] - backported to all
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=ef72f3110d8b19f4c098a0bff7ed7d11945e70c6 '''parisc: Fix kernel crash with reversed copy_from_user()'''] - backported to all
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=2ef4dfd9d9f288943e249b78365a69e3ea3ec072 '''parisc: Unbreak handling exceptions from kernel modules'''] - backported to all
** parisc: Update comment regarding relative extable support
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=366dd4ea9d5f0eb78fdf4982d76506f99480ec0a '''parisc: Fix ftrace function tracer'''] (not backported, maybe it should have been?)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=f0b22d1bb2a37a665a969e95785c75a4f49d1499 parisc: fix a bug when syscall number of tracee is __NR_Linux_syscalls] (backported to v4.0+)
* Kernel 4.7
** parisc: Fix typo in pdc.h
** parisc: Fix typo in ldcw.h
** parisc: Fix typos in eisa_eeprom.h
** parisc: Fix typo in fpudispatch.c
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=fc79168a7c75423047d60a033dc4844955ccae0b parisc: Add syscall tracepoint support]
** parisc: Simplify and speed up get_user() and put_user()
** parisc: Add 64bit get_user() and put_user() for 32bit kernel
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=64e2a42bca12e408f0258c56adcf3595bcd116e7 parisc: Add ARCH_TRACEHOOK and regset support]
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=54b668009076caddbede8fde513ca2c982590bfe '''parisc: Add native high-resolution sched_clock() implementation''']
** parisc: Merge ftrace C-helper and assembler functions into .text.hot section
** parisc: Use long jump to reach ftrace_return_to_handler()
** parisc: Whitespace cleanups in unistd.h
** parisc: Update futex.h to match generic implementation
** parisc: Fix printk time during boot
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8b78f260887df532da529f225c49195d18fef36b parisc: Fix pagefault crash in unaligned __get_user() call] - backported to all
** parisc: Move die_if_kernel() prototype into traps.h header
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=be24a89700eef61bedaba40f3b05ef07f5806e38 parisc: Fix backtrace on PA-RISC]
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8beb330044d0d1878c7b92290e91c0b889e92633 '''53c700: fix BUG on untagged commands'''] - fixes SCSI on 712/715 machines with sym7xx driver (backported to 4.6)
* Kernel 4.8
** parisc: Change structure intialisation to C99 style in iomap.c
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=773e1c5fa4bf1faa25e119490b26ece2ef1bdb46 parisc: Add <asm/hash.h>]
** parisc: Add break statements to pdc_pat_io_pci_cfg_read()
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=ae141830b118c3fb5b7eab6fa7c8ab7b7224b0a4 '''parisc: Fix automatic selection of cr16 clocksource'''] (backported to 4.7)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=3eb53b20d7bd1374598cfb1feaa081fcac0e76cd '''parisc: Fix order of EREFUSED define in errno.h'''] (backported to all)
* Kernel 4.9
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=690d097c00c88fa9d93d198591e184164b1d8c20 '''parisc: Increase KERNEL_INITIAL_SIZE for 32-bit SMP kernels'''] (backported to 4.4+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=4fe9e1d957e45ad8eba9885ee860a0e93d13a7c7 parisc: Drop bootmem and switch to memblock]
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=9e91db6b4abecd58647a5e984d538187f1c2ea09 parisc: Add hardened usercopy feature]
** parisc: Add cfi_startproc and cfi_endproc to assembly code
** parisc: Move hpmc stack into page aligned bss section
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=92420bd0d01f040bbf754e1d090be49ca6a1c8d6 '''parisc: Fix self-detected CPU stall warnings on Mako machines'''] (backported to 4.7+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b391667eb45a5a888bc9372462c5f647418c31af parisc: Report trap type as human readable string]
** parisc: Update comment regarding implementation of copy_user_page_asm
** parisc: Use kmalloc_array() in add_system_map_addresses()
** parisc: Check return value of smp_boot_one_cpu()
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b5d5cf2b8a68618a8ec646cab5746e2f539dc244 parisc: Drop BROKEN_RODATA config option]
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=65bf34f59594c11f13d371c5334a6a0a385cd7ae '''parisc: Increase initial kernel mapping size'''] (backported to v4.4+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=f8850abb7ba68229838014b3409460e576751c6d '''parisc: Fix kernel memory layout regarding position of __gp'''] (backported to v4.4+)
** parisc: Move exception table into read-only section
** parisc: Zero-initialize newly alloced memblock
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=0a862485f42af7df530b0b5f0e5ba8ffbb3a4a12 parisc: Show trap name in kernel crash]
** parisc: Migrate exception table users off module.h and onto extable.h
** parisc: use KERN_CONT when printing device inventory
** parisc: Use LINUX_GATEWAY_ADDR define instead of hardcoded value
** parisc: Ignore the pkey system calls for now
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=f4125cfdb3008363137f744c101e5d76ead760ba '''parisc: Avoid trashing sr2 and sr3 in LWS code''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6ed518328d0189e0fdf1bb7c73290d546143ea66 '''parisc: Ensure consistent state when switching to kernel stack at syscall entry'''] (backported to all)
** parisc: Fix printk continuations in system detection
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=43b1f6abd59063a088416a0df042b36450f91f75 '''parisc: Switch to generic sched_clock implementation'''] (backported to v4.7+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=741dc7bf1c7c7d93b853bb55efe77baa27e1b0a9 '''parisc: Fix races in parisc_setup_cache_timing()'''] (backported to v3.18+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c0452fb9fb8f49c7d68ab9fa0ad092016be7b45f '''parisc: Fix race in pci-dma.c'''] (backported to v3.16+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=5035b230e7b67ac12691ed3b5495bbb617027b68 '''parisc: Also flush data TLB in flush_icache_page_asm'''] (backported to v3.16+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=24d0492b7d5d321a9c5846c8c974eba9823ffaa0 parisc: Fix TLB related boot crash on SMP machines] (backported to v3.18+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c78e710c1c9fbeff43dddc0aa3d0ff458e70b0cc parisc: Purge TLB before setting PTE] (backported to v3.16+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=febe42964fe182281859b3d43d844bb25ca49367 parisc: Remove unnecessary TLB purges from flush_dcache_page_asm and flush_icache_page_asm] (backported to v3.16+)
* Kernel 4.10
** parisc: perf: return -EFAULT on error
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=18d98a79382cbe5a7569788d5b7b18e7015506f2 parisc: Enable KASLR]
** <del>[http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=5c38602d83e584047906b41b162ababd4db4106d parisc: Re-enable interrupts early]</del>
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=637250cc8f5e2bfc5c3a96802d1d96b4987a1d62 parisc: Enhance CPU detection code on PAT machines]
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=160494d381373cfa21208484aea4e5db2d3cb0a8 parisc: Optimize timer interrupt function]
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=41744213602a206f24adcb4a2b7551db3c700e72 '''parisc: Mark cr16 clocksource unstable on SMP systems'''] (backported to v4.8+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=1fe0a7e0bc52024a445945c9e7691551aba97390 parisc: Drop TIF_RESTORE_SIGMASK and switch to generic code]
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b4a9eb4cd5966c8aad3d007d206a2cbda97d6928 parisc: Add line-break when printing segfault info] (backported to v4.9)
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=83b5d1e3d3013dbf90645a5d07179d018c8243fa parisc, parport_gsc: Fixes for printk continuation lines]
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=2ad5d52d42810bed95100a3d912679d8864421ec '''parisc: Don't use BITS_PER_LONG in userspace-exported swab.h header'''] (backported to all, build-fix for qemu)
* Kernel 4.11
** parisc: eisa: Remove coding style errors
** parisc: eisa: Fix resource leaks in error paths
** parisc: ccio-dma: Handle return NULL error from ioremap_nocache
** parisc: fix a printk
** parisc: Define access_ok() as macro
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=ef470a60e10eb12635d7b84c9502cea3028d44e8 parisc: Remove flush_user_dcache_range and flush_user_icache_range]
** parisc: perf: Fix potential NULL pointer dereference
** parisc: Wire up statx system call
** parisc: Avoid compiler warnings with access_ok()
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=73580dac7618e4bcd21679f553cf3c97323fec46 parisc: Fix system shutdown halt]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=316ec0624f951166daedbe446988ef92ae72b59f parisc: Optimize flush_kernel_vmap_range and invalidate_kernel_vmap_range]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=5f655322b1ba4bd46e26e307d04098f9c84df764 parisc: support R_PARISC_SECREL32 relocation in modules] (backported to v4.10+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=554bfeceb8a22d448cd986fc9efce25e833278a1 '''parisc: Fix access fault handling in pa_memcpy()'''] (backported to v4.9+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=554bfeceb8a22d448cd986fc9efce25e833278a1 '''parisc: Clean up fixup routines for get_user()/put_user()'''] (backported to v4.9+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=476e75a44b56038bee9207242d4bc718f6b4de06 parisc: Avoid stalled CPU warnings after system shutdown] (backported to v4.9+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=409c1b250e30ad0e48b4d15d7319b4e18c046c4f '''parisc: fix bugs in pa_memcpy'''] (backported to v4.9+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=3f795cef0ecdf9bc980dd058d49bdab4b19af1d3 '''parisc: Fix get_user() for 64-bit value on 32-bit kernel'''] (backported to v4.9+)
* Kernel 4.12
** (none beside backports, pull request was too late during merge window)
* Kernel 4.13
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b0f94efd5aa8daa8a07d7601714c2573266cd4c9 '''parisc: use compat_sys_keyctl()'''] (backported to all)
** parisc: Inline trivial exception code in lusercopy.S
** parisc: Drop per_cpu uaccess related exception_data struct
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c8c3735997a3aa184fa81742bb6c4062a26af2f3 '''parisc: Enhance detection of synchronous cr16 clocksources''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c9c2877d08d9aa0ca0a5c227ac795fbb76269300 '''parisc: Add Page Deallocation Table (PDT) support''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=649aa24254e85bf6bd7807dd372d083707852b1f '''parisc/mm: Ensure IRQs are off in switch_mm()'''] (backported to  v4.7+)
** parisc: Avoid zeroing gr[0] in fixup_exception()
** parisc: Don't hardcode PSW values in gsc_*() functions
** parisc: Don't hardcode PSW values in hpmc code
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=247462316f85a9e0479445c1a4223950b68ffac1 '''parisc: Report SIGSEGV instead of SIGBUS when running out of stack'''] (backported to all, fixes libsigsegv package)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=33f9e02495d15a061f0c94ef46f5103a2d0c20f3 '''parisc: DMA API: return error instead of BUG_ON for dma ops on non dma devs'''] (backported to v3.13+, fixes parport_pc module crash)
** parisc: ->mapping_error
** parisc: pdc_stable: constify attribute_group structures.
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=5bc64bd246ca00e0bb0b7137afaf586f2f66a911 '''parisc: Disable further stack checks when panic occurs during stack check''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6cd819e8e978b361ae558056a9e79fd30e6acb0d parisc: Merge millicode routines via linker script]
** parisc: regenerate defconfig files
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=f520e55241e1cf0c10d308ccf47513f28533f60a parisc: Fix crash when calling PDC_PAT_MEM PDT firmware function]
** parisc: Add function to return DIMM slot of physical address
** parisc: Show DIMM slot number which holds broken memory module
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=56188832a50f09998cb570ba3771a1d25c193c0e '''parisc: Suspend lockup detectors before system halt'''] (backported to v4.9+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=ae7a609c34b6fb12328c553b5f9aab26ae74a28e '''parisc: Prevent TLB speculation on flushed pages on CPUs that only support equivalent aliases'''] (backported to v4.9+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=56008c04ebc099940021b714da2d7779117cf6a7 parisc: Extend disabled preemption in copy_user_page]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=74ad3d28af2104b92dd83a43add79e6a8c45d8e2 parisc: Define CONFIG_CPU_BIG_ENDIAN]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8f8201dfed91a43ac38c899c82f81eef3d36afd9 '''parisc: Increase thread and stack size to 32kb'''] (backported to v4.11+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=93964fd4ea6ab86a2d2853a9ae56ae0c24cbbe16 parisc: pdc_stable: Fix locking when creating sysfs links]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=13d57093c141db2036364d6be35e394fc5b64728 '''parisc: Handle vma's whose context is not current in flush_cache_range'''] (backported to v4.9+)
** printk-formats.txt: Better describe the difference between %pS and %pF
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=4098116039911e8870d84c975e2ec22dab65a909 '''parisc: pci memory bar assignment fails with 64bit kernels on dino/cujo'''] (backported to all)
* Kernel 4.14
** parisc: Add MADV_HWPOISON and MADV_SOFT_OFFLINE
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8a5aa00e6b9630d36d7681b38062a3d48d8b6ee6 '''parisc: PDT/firmware: Add support to read PDT on older PAT-machines''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=54ac8fcbd6e6777929235ac767467991005d2df3 '''parisc: PDT: Add full support for memory failure via Page Deallocation Table (PDT)''']
** parisc: Static initialization of spinlocks in perf and unwind code
** parisc: Drop exception_data struct
** parisc: Static initialization of pcxl_res_lock spinlock
** parisc: Drop MADV_SPACEAVAIL, MADV_VPS_PURGE and MADV_VPS_INHERIT
** parisc/random: Add machine specific randomness
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e35a2ce692821563583fa8b11ddf4acb24e54580 '''parisc: Enable UBSAN support''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=2f3c7b8137ef6a3f90850d7cb5dbd05d8940403a '''parisc: Add core code for self-extracting kernel''']
** parisc: Make existing core files reuseable for bootloader
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b6adc16e08e0ee8bbc9cccf7af3882b6e1cb30c2 '''parisc: Wire up support for self-extracting kernel''']
** parisc/harmony: Fix section mismatches
** parisc/sticore: Fix section mismatches
** parisc/mux: Fix section mismatches
** parisc/8250_gsc: Fix section mismatches
** parisc/scsi/zalon: Fix section mismatches
** parisc/scsi/lasi700: Fix section mismatches
** parisc/parport_gsc: Fix section mismatches
** parisc: Fix section mismatches in parisc core drivers
** parisc/serio: Fix section mismatches in gscps2 and hp_sdc drivers
** parisc/net/lasi_82596: Fix section mismatches
** parisc/input/hilkbd: Fix section mismatches
** parisc/ipmi_si_intf: Fix section mismatches on parisc platform
** parisc/core: Fix section mismatches
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d81f734462d439291531266c4004ab97e9a033cc '''parisc: Fix up devices below a PCI-PCI MegaRAID controller bridge''']
** printk-formats.txt: Add examples for %pF and %pS usage
** parisc: Optimize switch_mm
** parisc: Fix too large frame size warnings
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e77900abfd8be4e207412d8b7752dbb9838e2571 parisc: Stop unwinding at start of stack]
** parisc: Move start_parisc() into init section
** parisc: Add wrapper for pdc_instr() firmware function
** parisc: Add PDCE_CHECK instruction to HPMC handler
** parisc: Check if initrd was loaded into broken RAM
** parisc: Move init_per_cpu() into init section
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=606f95e4255845155f62504a9e1f12665b1853c8 '''parisc: Add HWPOISON page fault handler code''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=af21b01d1166248f282fc02d0f459c94de06615e '''parisc: Reintroduce option to gzip-compress the kernel''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8c031ba63f8f2a9efc471cb45b2ff18271556544 '''parisc: Unbreak bootloader due to gcc-7 optimizations''']
** parisc: Export __cmpxchg_u64 unconditionally
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8642b31ba9eef8a01845146a26682d4869e62513 '''parisc: Fix detection of nonsynchronous cr16 cycle counters'''] (backported to v4.13+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=374b3bf8e8b519f61eb9775888074c6e46b3bf0c '''parisc: Fix double-word compare and exchange in LWS code on 32-bit kernels'''] (backported to all/v3.13+)
* Kernel 4.15
** arch: Fix duplicates in Kconfig for parisc and sparc
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=bc5a768e567df51f43778da381477f6555f3824c parisc: Make some PDC structures accessible in uapi headers]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=3744d988c05a27f40408003352841aefadba1324 parisc: Pass endianness info to sparse]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=bf7b4c1b3c92f246a535a7c792177041d0442011 '''parisc: Add CPU topology support''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=05f016d2ca7a4fab99d5d5472168506ddf95e74f '''parisc: Fix validity check of pointer size argument in new CAS implementation'''] (backported to all/v3.13+)
** parisc: Fix indenting in puts() (backported to v4.14)
** parisc: Align os_hpmc_size on word boundary (backported to v4.14)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=bcf3f1752a622f1372d3252d0fea8855d89812e7 '''parisc: Hide Diva-built-in serial aux and graphics card'''] (backported to all/v3.0+) - '''important for rp3410/rp3440 machines'''
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=9352aeada4d8d8753fc0e414fbfe8fdfcb68a12c '''Revert "parisc: Re-enable interrupts early"'''] (backported to v4.10+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=da57c5414f49ef9e4bcb9ae0bbafd1d650b31411 '''parisc: Reduce thread stack to 16 kb''']
** parisc: remove duplicate includes
** parisc: Show unhashed hardware inventory
** parisc: Show initial kernel memory layout unhashed
** parisc: Show unhashed HPA of Dino chip
** parisc: Show unhashed EISA EEPROM address
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=88776c0e70be0290f8357019d844aae15edaa967 '''parisc: Fix alignment of pa_tlb_lock in assembly on 32-bit SMP kernel''']  (backported to v4.0+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=310d82784fb4d60c80569f5ca9f53a7f3bf1d477 '''parisc: qemu idle sleep support''']  (backported to v4.9+)
* Kernel 4.16
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=fd8d0ca2563151204f3fe555dc8ca4bcfe8677a3 parisc: Hide virtual kernel memory layout] (backported to v4.15)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=0ed1fe4ad394e54783bbffa84102faf435661a2e parisc: Check if secondary CPUs want own PDC calls] 
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=5ffa8518851f1401817c15d2a7eecc0373c26ff9 parisc: Use cr16 interval timers unconditionally on qemu] (backported to v4.9+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=636a415bcc7f4fd020ece8fd5fc648c4cef19c34 parisc: Reduce irq overhead when run in qemu] (backported to v4.14+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=0adb24e03a124b79130c9499731936b11ce2677d '''parisc: Fix ordering of cache and TLB flushes'''] (backported to v4.9+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=9ef0f88fe5466c2ca1d2975549ba6be502c464c1 '''parisc: Handle case where flush_cache_range is called with no context'''] (backported to v4.9+)
* Kernel 4.17
** parisc: Silence uninitialized variable warning in dbl_to_sgl_fcnvff()
** parisc/stifb: Use fb_memset() to avoid sparse warning
** parisc/parport_gsc: Use NULL to avoid sparse warning
** parisc/led: Fix sparse warnings
** parisc/gscps2: Fix sparse warnings
** parisc: Force to various endian types for sparse
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d5b59a71204b0a9a55eda633347b1214642bead3 '''parisc: Convert MAP_TYPE to cover 4 bits on parisc''']
** parisc: Move various functions and strings to init section
** parisc/Kconfig: SMP kernels boot on all machines
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=24002d59376e2d19a2a523fe88d5b32e691a43af '''parisc: machine_power_off() should call pm_power_off()''']
** parisc: Directly call machine_power_off() in power button driver
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d5654e156bc4d68a87bbaa6d7e020baceddf6e68 '''parisc: Fix HPMC handler by increasing size to multiple of 16 bytes''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b845f66f78bf42a4ce98e5cfe0e94fab41dd0742 '''parisc/pci: Switch LBA PCI bus from Hard Fail to Soft Fail mode'''] (backported to all kernels: 3.18.111 4.4.134 4.9.104 4.14.45 4.16.13 4.17)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=a77ab0e7ce232a62adac3d85b9ae66d0f48385ac '''parisc: Add code generator for Qemu/SeaBIOS machine info''']
** parisc: Fix out of array access in match_pci_device()
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c6185e285c5c7cfeab739bae7f206ced695f09c7 '''ipmi/parisc: Add IPMI chassis poweroff for certain HP PA-RISC and IA-64 servers''']
** parisc/signal: Add FPE_CONDTRAP for conditional trap handling
** parisc: Move cache flush functions into .text.hot section
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=71d577db01a5177c7807a2f3d3df9bab9d21c500 parisc: Switch to generic COMPAT_BINFMT_ELF]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=67698287031be7c1821f9b151237ca8cdb231fd1 parisc: Prevent panic at system halt]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=f76cdd00ef0e39d880139b074e3b247594dff95a parisc: time: Convert read_persistent_clock() to read_persistent_clock64()]
** parisc: Make bzImage default build target
** parisc: Document rules regarding checksum of HPMC handler
** parisc: drivers.c: Fix section mismatches
** parisc: Fix section mismatches
* Kernel 4.18
** parisc: Convert printk(KERN_LEVEL) to pr_lvl()
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=704e38303153c797d66c41bbe8325202f549b53c parisc: Drop struct sigaction from not exported header file]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=1c971f39e62222d567f179ccaa1a186f1c203b52 parisc: Mark 16kB and 64kB page sizes BROKEN]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=435d34c7a48de5e89047ef9c7dce6528831b258b parisc: Default to 4 SMP CPUs]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=2765b3edc41bdf18960ca7e6b656fb933ac191d6 parisc: Wire up io_pgetevents syscall]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=63ba82c0e63f1dd400d84e12f2142c2cb691aec1 parisc: Reduce debug output in unwind code]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=24b6c22504a27210a8377e54d24d425ae414f2c1 parisc: Build kernel without -ffunction-sections]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=66509a276c8c1d19ee3f661a41b418d101c57d29 parisc: Enable CONFIG_MLONGCALLS by default]  (backported to v4.0+) 
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=fedb8da96355f5f64353625bf96dc69423ad1826 '''parisc: Define mb() and add memory barriers to assembler unlock sequences''']  (backported to v4.0+)
* Kernel 4.19
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=a34a9b9682a5a9de53386ed0872c7d38ca9d6b38 parisc: merge pcx_dma_ops and pcxl_dma_ops]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=7f1501053811414ddeff63db8f5d41bdbe38068f parisc: always use flush_kernel_dcache_range for DMA cache maintainance]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c1f59375b3782f478ac2c488889abdc00dd8e25f '''parisc: use generic dma_noncoherent_ops''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=93cb8e20d56be40c541475f77b5f565fbb385a4b '''parisc: Drop architecture-specific ENOTSUP define''']
** parisc: Add HAVE_REGS_AND_STACK_ACCESS_API feature
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c8921d72e390cb6fca3fb2b0c2badfda851647eb '''parisc: Fix and improve kernel stack unwinding''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=7797167ffde1f00446301cb22b37b7c03194cfaf '''parisc: Remove ordered stores from syscall.S'''] (backported to v4.0+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=3b885ac1dc35b87a39ee176a6c7e2af9c789d8b8 '''parisc: Remove unnecessary barriers from spinlock.h'''] (backported to v4.0+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=4a53ec1ccf932f86845c96a5092ba4507621c84d parisc: prefer _THIS_IP_ and _RET_IP_ statement expressions]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=5b00ca0b8035e49ef7c466e959c5cb457a654351 '''parisc: Restore possibility to execute 64-bit applications''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b6fc0cccb6b35815a7d1cfc9279cdbfc2c61d00d '''parisc: Fix ptraced 64-bit applications to call 64-bit syscalls''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=54c770da992387abfa7df4817404d000ef034fa8 parisc: Update comments in syscall.S regarding wide userland]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=9e0d5c451f9e559dd06af3fff49a0d2068c634c4 parisc: Consolidate unwind initialization calls]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8801ccb9fa524c195322c26b6d44e99827772bde '''parisc: Fix boot failure of 64-bit kernel''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=dbf2a4b1ffab2867505be3b24221d5efa2200c91 parisc: Add hardware description to stack traces]
** parisc: Fix uninitialized variable usage in unwind.c
* Kernel 4.20
** parisc: remove the dead ccio-rm-dma driver
** parisc: Use PARISC_ITLB_TRAP constant in entry.S
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=fe8376dbbd6ac1febb0fd6389e3ec4f349e70c71 parisc: Add SYSTEM_INFO and REGISTER TOC PAT functions]
** parisc: Clean up crash header output
** parisc: dino: Utilize DINO_MASK_IRQ() macro
** parisc: Ratelimit dino stuck interrupt warnings
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=3c229b3f2dd8133f61bb81d3cb018be92f4bba39 '''parisc: Fix map_pages() to not overwrite existing pte entries'''] (backported to all)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=99a3ae51d557d8e38a7aece65678a31f9db215ee '''parisc: Fix exported address of os_hpmc handler'''] (backported to 4.9+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=db139d71c4c377c56a67ae219f120186ce9934d1 '''extract-vmlinux: Check for uncompressed image as fallback''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=34c201ae49fe9e0bf3b389da5869d810f201c740 parisc: Include compressed vmlinux file in vmlinuz boot kernel]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=3847dab77421867fbc77faacb2f377d44e729e1b '''parisc: Add alternative coding infrastructure''']
** parisc: Use zdep for shlw macro on PA1.1 and PA2.0
** parisc: Drop two instructions from pte lookup code
** parisc: Add PDC PAT cell_info() and pd_get_pdc_revisions() functions
** parisc: Retrieve and display the PDC PAT capabilities
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=a886c9791aed64d73f8c0038cc1506741ba216fa '''parisc: Reorder TLB flush timing calculation''']
** parisc: Remove PTE load and fault check from L2_ptep macro
** <del>[http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d27dfa13b9f77ae7e6ed09d70a0426ed26c1a8f9 '''parisc: Release spinlocks using ordered store''']</del>
** parisc: Purge TLB entries after updating page table entry and set page accessed flag in TLB handler
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=1138b6718ff74d2a934459643e3754423d23b5e2 '''parisc: Fix address in HPMC IVA'''] (backported to all)
** parisc: Remove pte_inserted define
** parisc: Optimze cache flush algorithms
** parisc: remove check for minimum required GCC version
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c9fa406f62ec952bc4689b5120a02759ce42a68d parisc: Fix A500 boot crash]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=87613bb9d20c556b5eeae04f4caf40701189f07b parisc: Use LINUX_GATEWAY_SPACE constant in entry.S]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=9a298b445514b3de08252c71833f9273b7727355 '''parisc64: change __kernel_suseconds_t to match glibc''']
** parisc: Revert "Release spinlocks using ordered store"
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/deller/parisc-linux.git/commit/?h=parisc-4.20-4&id=1e8249b8a4e960018e4baca6b523b8a4500af600 parisc: Enable -ffunction-sections for modules on 32-bit kernel] (backported to v4.18+)
* Kernel 5.0
** parisc: move __IGNORE* entries to non uapi header
** parisc: add __NR_syscalls along with __NR_Linux_syscalls
** parisc: remove __NR_Linux from uapi header file.
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=85e69701f58c9b2ec2975e31518b60e056bfebdf '''parisc: add system call table generation support''']
** parisc: generate uapi header and system call table files
** parisc: syscalls: ignore nfsservctl for other architectures
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8cc28269b9574103aae9088a02a20929ec75f983 parisc: Split out alternative live patching code]
** parisc: Fix serio address output
** parisc: Fix HP SDC hpa address output
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=dfbaecb2b707cfdc5276b548d52b437384bd6483 '''parisc: Remap hugepage-aligned pages in set_kernel_text_rw()'''] (backported to 4.20) 
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b7dc5a071ddf69c0350396b203cba32fe5bab510 '''parisc: Fix ptrace syscall number modification'''] (backported to 4.5+)
** CREDITS/MAINTAINERS: Retire parisc-linux.org email domain
* Kernel 5.1
** parisc: don't include <asm/cacheflush.h> in <asm/dma-mapping.h>
** parisc: move internal implementation details out of <asm/dma-mapping.h>
** parisc: turn GET_IOC into an inline function
** parisc: properly type the iommu field in struct pci_hba_data
** parisc: properly type the return value of parisc_walk_tree
** parisc/dino: use container_of in DINO_DEV
** parisc/lba_pci: use container_of in LBA_DEV
** parisc: remove the HBA_DATA macro
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=81fe5bba88a3fbe34ee6c5d18e327c6aaacd588c '''parisc: Hide built-in serial aux port of Tosca GSP card''']
** parisc: Show rescheduling interrupts on SMP machines only
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b102f29b2d8603f15071384e88125b8eab5f8faa '''parisc: Count IPI function call interrupts''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=f73493eb4aecdd6edd8a749890e6e2dcfa0a7978 '''parisc: Improve initial IRQ to CPU assignment''']
** <del>parisc: Use F_EXTEND() macro in iosapic code</del> (reverted later on)
** parisc: Add constants for PDC_RELOCATE PDC call
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8207d4ee44d3f525bf9aa57807ac9db5d0d90c1a '''parisc: Show machine product number during boot''']
** parisc: Add constant for PDC_PAT_COMPLEX firmware call
** parisc: Add constants for various PDC firmware calls
** parisc: remove meaningless ccflags-y in arch/parisc/boot/Makefile
** parisc: use memblock_alloc() instead of custom get_memblock()
** parisc: replace oops_in_progress manipulation with bust_spinlocks()
** parisc: Add PDC_CRASH_PREP PDC function number
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c2f8d7cb32cd95e3005bed58ce02afa686b9f357 Revert: parisc: Use F_EXTEND() macro in iosapic code]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d006e95b5561f708d0385e9677ffe2c46f2ae345 '''parisc: Detect QEMU earlier in boot process'''] (backported to v4.9+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=45efd871bf0a47648f119d1b41467f70484de5bc '''parisc: regs_return_value() should return gpr28'''] (backported to v4.14+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=f324fa58327791b2696628b31480e7e21c745706 '''parisc: also set iaoq_b in instruction_pointer_set()'''] (backported to v4.19+)
* Kernel 5.2
**  parisc: Consider stack randomization for mmap base only when necessary
**  [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=3e1120f4b57bc12437048494ab56648edaa5b57d parisc: Export running_on_qemu symbol for modules] (backported to v4.9+)
**  parisc: Tune LASI LAN for QEMU
**  parisc: Skip registering LED when running in QEMU (backported to v4.9+)
**  parisc: PA-Linux requires at least 32 MB RAM
**  parisc: Show n/a if product number not available
**  [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=dbdf0760990583649bfaca75fd98f76afd5f3905 '''parisc: Switch from DISCONTIGMEM to SPARSEMEM''']
**  parisc: Add memory barrier to asm pdc and sync instructions (backported to v4.20+)
**  [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d19a12906e5e558c0f6b6cfece7b7caf1012ef95 parisc: Allow live-patching of __meminit functions] (backported to v4.20+)
**  parisc: Rename LEVEL to PA_ASM_LEVEL to avoid name clash with DRBD code (backported to all)
**  parisc: Use PA_ASM_LEVEL in boot code (backported to v4.14+)
**  [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=62217beb394e654bbd2bb87c533dadd2d8bf62c6 '''parisc: Add static branch and JUMP_LABEL feature''']
**  [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6c63ef80014b60ab13bee7e683d0a95521bb7fdd '''parisc: Remove lock code to serialize TLB operations in pacache.S''']
**  parisc: Use ldcw instruction for SMP spinlock release barrier
**  [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=44224bdb99150ad17cf394973b25736cb92c246a parisc: Add memory clobber to TLB purges] (backported to v4.20+)
**  parisc: Update huge TLB page support to use per-pagetable spinlock
**  [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b37d1c1898b288c69f3dc9267bc2c41af06f4a4b '''parisc: Use per-pagetable spinlock''']
**  parisc: add set_fixmap()/clear_fixmap()
**  [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=620a53d522ba007a79fffc444bd75e8d3775f5b8 '''parisc: add parisc code patching''']
**  [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=eacbfce19d8b6dbd7958cbe01d65a21324cc2fad '''parisc: add KGDB support''']
**  parisc: add functions required by KPROBE_EVENTS
**  [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8858ac8e9e9b1894f7bb218bc0035532371b8d7e '''parisc: Implement kprobes''']
**  parisc: remove kprobes.h from generic-y
**  [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e0b59b7b633ab72c08bb9bac36afaeaade011ddf '''parisc: Implement kretprobes''']
**  doc: update kprobes supported architecture list
**  parisc: remove unused flags parameter in __patch_text()
**  parisc: update feature lists
**  parisc: enable wide mode early
**  [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e6eb5fe9123f05dcbf339ae5c0b6d32fcc0685d5 parisc: Drop LDCW barrier in CAS code when running UP]
**  [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8d0e051cc75e2b1a7e2fd51fc56af332c9619618 parisc: Enable the ro_after_init feature]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=200036a8e802dee09103031eeeaea91dd212ec99 '''parisc: Allow building 64-bit kernel without -mlong-calls compiler option''']
** parisc: Fix compiler warnings in float emulation code
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=527a1d1ede98479bf90c31a64822107ac7e6d276 '''parisc: Fix crash due alternative coding for NP iopdir_fdc bit''']  (backported to v5.0+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=63923d2c3800919774f5c651d503d1dd2adaddd5 '''parisc: Use implicit space register selection for loading the coherence index of I/O pdirs'''] (backported to all)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=116d753308cf032159c7b7aa87c9605bb5354784 '''parisc: Use lpa instruction to load physical addresses in driver code''']
** parisc: configs: Remove useless UEVENT_HELPER_PATH
** parisc: Kconfig: remove ARCH_DISCARD_MEMBLOCK
** parisc/slab: cleanup after /proc/slab_allocators removal
** parisc: Fix module loading error with JUMP_LABEL feature
* Kernel 5.3
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6ca6366220ed285e29ee22f4cf5c68a0397cb005 '''parisc: add dynamic ftrace''']
** compiler.h: add CC_USING_PATCHABLE_FUNCTION_ENTRY
** parisc: add support for patching multiple words
** parisc: add spinlock to patch function
** parisc: add WARN_ON() to clear_fixmap
** parisc: use pr_debug() in kernel/module.c
** parisc: asm: psw.h: missing header guard
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=10835c854685393a921b68f529bf740fa7c9984d '''parisc: Fix kernel panic due invalid values in IAOQ0 or IAOQ1'''] (backported to all)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=34c32fc603311a72cb558e5e337555434f64c27b '''parisc: Ensure userspace privilege for ptraced processes in regset functions'''] (backported to 4.7+)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=59a783dbc0d5fd6792aabff933055373b6dcbf2a '''parisc: Avoid kernel panic triggered by invalid kprobe'''] (backported to 5.2)
** parisc: Wire up clone3 syscall
** parisc: add kprobe_fault_handler()
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=69245c97560b40f88c609b078f4b51c5be81d88b parisc: Flush ITLB in flush_tlb_all_local() only on split TLB machines]
** parisc: Mark expected switch fall-throughs in fault.c
** parisc: Fix fall-through warnings in fpudispatch.c
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=3fe6c873af2f2247544debdbe51ec29f690a2ccf parisc: Fix build of compressed kernel even with debug enabled]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e50beea8e7738377b4fa664078547be338038ff9 parisc: Strip debug info from kernel before creating compressed vmlinuz]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=f2c5ed0dd5004c2cff5c0e3d430a107576fcc17f parisc: Add archclean Makefile target]
** parisc: rename default_defconfig to defconfig
** parisc: fix race condition in patching code
* Kernel 5.4
** <del>[http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=83af58f8068ea3f7b3c537c37a30887bfa585069 '''parisc: Add assembly implementations for memset, strlen, strcpy, strncpy and strcat''']</del> (was reverted)
** parisc: Add ALTERNATIVE_CODE() and ALT_COND_RUN_ON_QEMU
** parisc: speed up flush_tlb_all_local with qemu
** parisc: Avoid warning when loading hppb driver
** parisc: Convert eisa_enumerator to use pr_cont()
** parisc: Drop comments which are already in pci.h
** parisc: Save some bytes in dino driver
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=5fa1659105fac63e0f3c199b476025c2e04111ce '''parisc: Disable HP HSC-PCI Cards to prevent kernel crash'''] (backported to all)
** parisc: Have git ignore generated real2.S and firmware.c
** kprobes/parisc: remove arch_kprobe_on_func_entry()
** parisc/ftrace: Add ARCH_SUPPORTS_FTRACE_OPS support
** parisc/ftrace: Add KPROBES_ON_FTRACE
** parisc: Update feature list
** parisc: trigger die notifier chain in parisc_terminate()
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=175fca3bf91a1111b7e46f6655666640556b9059 '''kexec: add KEXEC_ELF''']
** kexec_elf: change order of elf_*_to_cpu() functions
** kexec_elf: remove parsing of section headers
** kexec_elf: remove PURGATORY_STACK_SIZE
** kexec_elf: remove Elf_Rel macro
** kexec_elf: remove unused variable in kexec_elf_load()
** kexec_elf: support 32 bit ELF files
** parisc: add __pdc_cpu_rendezvous()
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=fc697dc0c26a5908d467454e49440862d7fe96d0 '''parisc: add kexec syscall support''']
** parisc: wire up kexec_file_load syscall
** parisc: add support for kexec_file_load() syscall
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c32c47aa364096124c9c69c1a44918433832562b parisc: Remove 32-bit DMA enforcement from sba_iommu]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=513f7f747e1cba81f28a436911fba0b485878ebd '''parisc: Fix vmap memory leak in ioremap()/iounmap()'''] (backported to v3.16+)
** parisc: prefer __section from compiler_attributes.h
** parisc: sysctl.c: Use CONFIG_PARISC instead of __hppa_ define
** MAINTAINERS: Add hp_sdc drivers to parisc arch
* Kernel 5.5
** parisc: Do not hardcode registers in checksum functions
** kexec: Fix pointer-to-int-cast warnings
** parisc: Avoid spurious inequivalent alias kernel error messages
** parisc: use pgtable-nopXd instead of 4level-fixup
** parisc: soft_offline_page() now takes the pfn
** parisc: Fix compiler warnings in debug_core.c
** parisc: fix compilation when KEXEC=n and KEXEC_FILE=y
** parisc: add missing __init annotation
* Kernel 5.6
** parisc: Regenerate parisc defconfigs
** parisc: map_pages(): cleanup page table initialization
** parisc: Fix defconfig selection
* Kernel 5.7
** parisc: remove nargs from __SYSCALL
** parisc: Refactor alternative code to accept multiple conditions
** parisc: Rework arch_rw locking functions
** parisc: Improve interrupt handling in arch_spin_lock_flags()
** parisc: Replace setup_irq() by request_irq()
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=bf71bc16e02162388808949b179d59d0b571b965 '''parisc: Fix kernel panic in mem_init()'''] (backported to all) 
* Kernel 5.8
** parisc: use -fno-strict-aliasing for decompressor
** parisc: suppress error messages for 'make clean'
** parisc: Kconfig: Update references to parisc website
** parisc: firmware: Update references to parisc website
** parisc: hardware: Update references to parisc website
** parisc: module: Update references to parisc website
** parisc: MAINTAINERS: Update references to parisc website
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b6522fa409cfafbc3968679b09e4028f0609f2b9 parisc: add sysctl file interface panic_on_stackoverflow]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=be6577af0cef934ccb036445314072e8cb9217b9 '''parisc: Add atomic64_set_release() define to avoid CPU soft lockups'''] (backported to all - fixes TLB stalls)
** parisc: add support for cmpxchg on u8 pointers
* Kernel 5.9
** parisc: Replace HTTP links with HTTPS ones
** parisc: Convert to BIT_MASK() and BIT_WORD()
** parisc: Report bad pages as HardwareCorrupted
** Revert "parisc: Improve interrupt handling in arch_spin_lock_flags()"
** Revert "parisc: Drop LDCW barrier in CAS code when running UP"
** Revert "parisc: Use ldcw instruction for SMP spinlock release barrier"
** Revert "parisc: Revert "Release spinlocks using ordered store""
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e72b23dec1da5e62a0090c5da1d926778284e230 '''parisc: Do not use an ordered store in pa_tlb_lock()'''] (backported to 5.0+)
** parisc: elf.h: delete a duplicated word
** parisc: make the log level string for register dumps const
** sections.h: dereference_function_descriptor() returns void pointer
** parisc: Whitespace cleanups in atomic.h
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e96ebd589debd9a6a793608c4ec7019c38785dea '''parisc: Implement __smp_store_release and __smp_load_acquire barriers'''] (backported to 4.14+)
** parisc/kernel/ftrace: Remove function callback casts
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=5b24993c21cbf2de11aff077a48c5cb0505a0450 '''parisc: mask out enable and reserved bits from sba imask'''] (backported to all)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6f6aea7e966cda5a817d091e938c2d9b52209893 '''parisc: fix PMD pages allocation by restoring pmd_alloc_one()''']
* Kernel 5.10
** parisc: disable CONFIG_IDE in defconfigs
** fw_cfg: Add support for parisc architecture
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=024f5b597564acced9e69305f7a9ef1202186a61 '''parisc: Add qemu fw_cfg interface''']
** parisc: Avoid external interrupts when IPI finishes
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=41f5a81c07cd410917c9ae3c165b9b761d48ba75 parisc: Drop HP-UX specific fcntl and signal flags]
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=75ae04206a4d0e4f541c1d692b7febd1c0fdb814 '''parisc: Define O_NONBLOCK to become 000200000''']
** parisc: Drop useless comments in uapi/asm/signal.h
** parisc: Add ioread64_hi_lo() and iowrite64_hi_lo()
** parisc: Install vmlinuz instead of zImage file
** parisc: Add MAP_UNINITIALIZED define
** parisc/sticon: Always register sticon console driver
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=7ff3f14ddc355bfbc94c766f43b90606b1f79e83 '''parisc/sticon: Add user font support''']
** parisc: Add alternative patching to synchronize_caches define
** parisc: Fix comments and enable interrupts later
** parisc: Mark pointers volatile in __xchg8(), __xchg32() and __xchg64()
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=53a42b6324b8ddce1e9d2f34da2ca68ef21c2084 '''parisc: Switch to more fine grained lws locks''']
** parisc: Rewrite tlb flush threshold calculation
** parisc: Improve spinlock handling
** parisc: Improve error return codes when setting rtc time
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=879bc2d27904354b98ca295b6168718e045c4aa2 '''hil/parisc: Disable HIL driver when it gets stuck''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=44a4c9e443674e6cd3368d3e642dfe9c429d5525 '''parisc: Add wrapper syscalls to fix O_NONBLOCK flag usage''']
** ata: pata_ns87415.c: Document support on parisc with superio chip
* Kernel 5.11
** parisc: pci-dma: fix warning unused-function
** parisc/uapi: Use Kbuild logic to provide <asm/types.h>
** parisc: Drop loops_per_jiffy from per_cpu struct
** parisc: Use _TIF_USER_WORK_MASK in entry.S
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=22ee3ea588dfc84ccb8cea5ea37051dfed91b9b9 parisc: Make user stack size configurable]
** parisc: Remove leftover reference to the power_tasklet
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=00e35f2b0e8acb88d4e1aa96ff0490e3bfe46580 '''parisc: Enable -mlong-calls gcc option by default when !CONFIG_MODULES'''] (backported to v5.6+)
* Kernel 5.12
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b7795074a04669d0a023babf786d29bf67c68783 '''parisc: Optimize per-pagetable spinlocks''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=2347961b11d4079deace3c81dceed460c08a8fc1 '''binfmt_misc: pass binfmt_misc flags to the interpreter'''] (needed for better qemu-user support on all platforms)
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c70919bd9d0782a6078ccd37d7f861d514f5481e '''parisc: Fix IVT checksum calculation wrt HPMC''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=31680c1d1595a59e17c14ec036b192a95f8e5f4a parisc: Bump 64-bit IRQ stack size to 64 KB]
** parisc: Drop out of get_whan() if task is running again
** parisc: Use the generic devmem_is_allowed()
** parisc: Replace test_ti_thread_flag() with test_tsk_thread_flag()
** parisc: Enable -mlong-calls gcc option with CONFIG_COMPILE_TEST (backported to v5.6+)
** arch/parisc/kernel: remove duplicate include in ptrace
** parisc: math-emu: Few spelling fixes in the file fpu.h
** parisc: avoid a warning on u8 cast for cmpxchg on u8 pointers (backported to v5.8+)
** parisc: parisc-agp requires SBA IOMMU driver (backported to all)
** parisc: Remove duplicate struct task_struct declaration
* Kernel 5.13
** parisc: switch to generic syscall header scripts
* Kernel 5.14
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=f6a3308d6feb351d9854eb8b3f6289a1ac163125 '''Revert "parisc: Add assembly implementations for memset, strlen, strcpy, strncpy and strcat"'''] (backported to 5.4+)
* Kernel 5.15
** parisc: switch from 'pci_' to 'dma_' API
** parisc/parport_gsc: switch from 'pci_' to 'dma_' API
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=55b70eed81cba1331773d4aaf5cba2bb07475cd8 parisc: Increase size of gcc stack frame check]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6f1fce595b78b775d7fb585c15c2dc3a6994f96e parisc: math-emu: Fix fall-through warnings]
** parisc: Replace symbolic permissions with octal permissions
** parisc: math-emu: Avoid "fmt" macro collision
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d220da0967dbda232350c5dc39317e04e0892743 parisc: remove unused arch/parisc/boot/install.sh and its phony target]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6ef4661cad32b5098ffb31be3282c866befde85f parisc: move core-y in arch/parisc/Makefile to arch/parisc/Kbuild]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=5f6e0fe01b6b33894cf6f61b359ab5a6d2b7674e parisc: Fix compile failure when building 64-bit kernel natively]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=7bf82eb3873fbbee8273f60ddef584194b99f6c1 parisc: Rename PMD_ORDER to PMD_TABLE_ORDER]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=030f653078316a9cc9ca6bd1b0234dcf858be35d '''parisc: fix crash with signals and alloca'''] (backported to all)
** parisc: ccio-dma.c: Added tab instead of spaces
** parisc: Make struct parisc_driver::remove() return void
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e5a2cac908df691f1637f9272d4c6dec83239611 parisc: Drop __arch_swab16(), arch_swab24(), _arch_swab32() and __arch_swab64() functions]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c42813b71a06a2ff4a155aa87ac609feeab76cf3 '''parisc: Fix unaligned-access crash in bootloader'''] (backported to v5.14)
** parisc: Move pci_dev_is_behind_card_dino to where it is used
** parisc: Add missing FORCE prerequisite in Makefile
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=1260dea6d2eb75706c978da828a36f0def590d3a '''parisc: Drop strnlen_user() in favour of generic version''']
** parisc: Drop useless debug info and comments from signal.c
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=3e4a1aff2a97cb4fd7f0268e4b69e8c9d3641277 parisc: Check user signal stack trampoline is inside TASK_SIZE]
** <del>[https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e4f2006f1287e7ea17660490569cff323772dac4 '''parisc: Reduce sigreturn trampoline to 3 instructions''']</del> '''(was reverted in v5.15 and v5.16)'''
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d97180ad68bdb7ee10f327205a649bc2f558741d parisc: Mark sched_clock unstable only if clocks are not syncronized]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=671028728083e856e9919221b109e3b2cd2ccc49 '''parisc: Implement __get/put_kernel_nofault()'''] (Dropped CONFIG_SET_FS incl. KERNEL_DS and USER_DS)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=90cc7bed1ed19f869ae7221a6b41887fe762a6a3 parisc: Use absolute_pointer() to define PAGE0]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=9caea0007601d3bc6debec04f8b4cd6f4c2394be parisc: Declare pci_iounmap() parisc version only when CONFIG_PCI enabled]
* Kernel 5.16
** parisc: Make use of the helper macro kthread_run()
** parisc: make parisc_acctyp() available outside of faults.c
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=aeb1e833a4c38efffad9556cf7f458c4e5de5b45 '''parisc: Switch to ARCH_STACKWALK implementation''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=ec5c115050f59114e216212837f1c1ebc54bdfc9 '''parisc: Add KFENCE support''']
** parisc: Define FRAME_ALIGN and PRIV_USER/PRIV_KERNEL in assembly.h
** parisc: Allocate task struct with stack frame alignment
** parisc: Use FRAME_SIZE and FRAME_ALIGN from assembly.h
** parisc: Use PRIV_USER instead of 3 in entry.S
** task_stack: Fix end_of_stack() for architectures with upwards-growing stack
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8779e05ba8aaffec1829872ef9774a71f44f6580 '''parisc: Fix ptrace check on syscall return'''] (backported to all)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=2214c0e77259b420402e279e9ab4277ef320d371 '''parisc: Move thread_info into task struct''']
** parisc: Use PRIV_USER in syscall.S
** parisc: Use PRIV_USER and PRIV_KERNEL in ptrace.h
** parisc: Drop ifdef __KERNEL__ from non-uapi kernel headers
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=3759778e6b8c0d547d77f681a7779edccdf1710a '''parisc: enhance warning regarding usage of O_NONBLOCK''']
** parisc: Remove unused constants from asm-offsets.c
** parisc: Update defconfigs
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6e866a462867b60841202e900f10936a0478608c '''parisc: Fix set_fixmap() on PA1.x CPUs'''] (backported to v5.3+)
** parisc: decompressor: remove repeated depenency of misc.o
** parisc: decompressor: clean up Makefile
** parisc/unwind: use copy_from_kernel_nofault()
** parisc: disable preemption during local tlb flush
** parisc: deduplicate code in flush_cache_mm() and flush_cache_range()
** parisc: fix preempt_count() check in entry.S
** parisc: disable preemption in send_IPI_allbutself()
** parisc: fix warning in flush_tlb_all
** parisc/unwind: fix unwinder when CONFIG_64BIT is enabled
** parisc: move virt_map macro to assembly.h
** parisc: add PIM TOC data structures
** parisc/firmware: add functions to retrieve TOC data
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=bc294838cc3443a2fbec58f8936ad4bd0a0b3055 '''parisc: add support for TOC (transfer of control)''']
** parisc/kgdb: add kgdb_roundup() to make kgdb work with idle polling
** parisc: mark xchg functions notrace
** parisc/ftrace: set function trace function
** parisc/ftrace: use static key to enable/disable function graph tracer
** parisc: Use swap() to swap values in setup_bootmem()
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=014966dcf76bce5717f7d974d0410d3402a651c2 '''parisc: don't enable irqs unconditionally in handle_interruption()''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=7e992711dddbdb1c27d077432d8440fefd44819f '''parisc: Don't disable interrupts in cmpxchg and futex operations''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=2a2e8202c7a16a85a881ad2b6e32ccbebdc01dda parisc: move CPU field back into thread_info]
** <del>[https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=279917e27edc293eb645a25428c6ab3f3bca3f86 '''parisc: Fix backtrace to always include init funtion names''']</del> (backported to v5.4+ - and '''reverted in v5.16''')
** parisc: Fix implicit declaration of function __kernel_text_address
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=38860b2c8bb1b92f61396eb06a63adff916fc31d '''parisc: Flush kernel data mapping in set_pte_at() when installing pte for user page'''] (backported to v5.12+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=3ec18fc7831e7d79e2d536dd1f3bc0d3ba425e8a '''parisc/entry: fix trace test in syscall exit path''']  to-be-backported!
** parisc: Include stringify.h to avoid build error in crypto/api.c
** parisc: Wire up futex_waitv
** parisc: Wrap assembler related defines inside __ASSEMBLY__
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=79df39d535c7a3770856fe9f5aba8c0ad1eebdb6 '''Revert "parisc: Reduce sigreturn trampoline to 3 instructions"'''] (reverted in v5.15 too)
** parisc: Enable CONFIG_PRINTK_TIME=y in 32bit defconfig
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=bec05f33ebc1006899c6d3e59a00c58881fe7626 '''parisc/sticon: fix reverse colors'''] (backported to all)
** parisc: Increase FRAME_WARN to 2048 bytes on parisc
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=169d1a4a2adb2c246396c56aa2f9eec3868546f1 '''parisc: Provide an extru_safe() macro to extract unsigned bits''']
** parisc: Convert PTE lookup to use extru_safe() macro
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=98400ad75e95860e9a10ec78b0b90ab66184a2ce '''Revert "parisc: Fix backtrace to always include init funtion names"'''] (backported to v5.4+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=df2ffeda6370a77011902e7c9d7a1eb1cbffed4f '''parisc: Fix extraction of hash lock bits in syscall.S''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=1d7c29b77725d05faff6754d2f5e7c147aedcf93 parisc: Fix KBUILD_IMAGE for self-extracting kernel] (backported to v4.14+)
** parisc: Enable sata sil, audit and usb support on 64-bit defconfig
** parisc/agp: Annotate parisc agp init functions with __init
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=0f9fee4cdebfbe695c297e5b603a275e2557c1cc parisc: Fix "make install" on newer debian releases] (backported to v3.13+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=afdb4a5b1d340e4afffc65daa21cc71890d7d589 '''parisc: Mark cr16 CPU clocksource unstable on all SMP machines'''] (backported to v4.14+)
** parisc: Clear stale IIR value on instruction access rights trap
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8f66fce0f46560b9e910787ff7ad0974441c4f9c '''parisc: Correct completer in lws start'''] (backported to v4.19+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d3a5a68cff47f6eead84504c3c28376b85053242 '''parisc: Fix mask used to select futex spinlock'''] (backported to v5.10+)
** parisc: remove ARCH_DEFCONFIG
* Kernel 5.17
** parisc: io: Improve the outb(), outw() and outl() macros
** parisc: pdc_stable: use default_groups in kobj_type
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=4b9d2a731c3d22a05c1bccdb11b6e00054ff5fda parisc: Switch user access functions to signal errors in r29 instead of r8]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=712a270d2db967b387338c26c3dc04ccac3fcec3 parisc: Fix pdc_toc_pim_11 and pdc_toc_pim_20 definitions] (backported to v5.16)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c1c72d9bbf2bf91670ac589adf037f433642fff5 parisc: Add kgdb io_module to read chars via PDC]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d6ab9fc74513ae6501afcdae2547334a03b9a5c9 '''parisc: Enable TOC (transfer of contents) feature unconditionally''']
** parisc: Re-use toc_stack as hpmc_stack
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=16f035d9e264d95d61d5f4056bb00d8169a7a3d1 '''sections: Fix __is_kernel() to include init ranges''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=68d247ad38b1ef46bd945a5220fa6d28c901c2f2 parisc: Default to 16 CPUs on 32-bit kernel]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=45458aa49abe3b0ac68ce86b3d4ca3a97eaeac53 parisc: Define depi_safe macro]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=db19c6f1a2a353cc8dec35b4789733a3cf6e2838 '''parisc: Fix lpa and lpa_user defines'''] (backported to v5.2+)
** parisc: Avoid calling faulthandler_disabled() twice
** parisc: Don't call faulthandler_disabled() in do_page_fault()
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=20dda87bdc6567e864942ead40bc149ebbe3ae79 parisc: Enhance page fault termination message]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d0585d742ff2d82accd26c661c60a6d260429c4a '''parisc: Rewrite light-weight syscall and futex code''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=72c3dd8207de4178ae50553666129af7231f86e7 '''parisc: Add lws_atomic_xchg and lws_atomic_store syscalls''']
** parisc: decompressor: do not copy source files while building
** parisc: Add visible flag to toc_stack variable
** parisc: Use safer strscpy() in setup_cmdline()
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=5f7ee6e37a3cadefe45378c17c4285fa41141d92 '''parisc: Autodetect default output device and set console= kernel parameter''']
** parisc: Fix missing prototype for 'toc_intr' warning in toc.c
** parisc: pdc_stable: Fix memory leak in pdcs_register_pathentries
** parisc: Add ioread64_lo_hi() and iowrite64_lo_hi()
** <del>[https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b160628e9ebcdc85d0db9d7f423c26b3c7c179d0 '''parisc: Show error if wrong 32/64-bit compiler is being used'''] (backported to v5.15+)</del> (reverted in v6.0)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=dbd0b42350d5717786cb8257fbe5b528f3af9772 '''parisc: Fix some apparent put_user() failures''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=9129886b88185962538180625ca8051362b01327 '''parisc: Drop __init from map_pages declaration'''] (backported to v5.4+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b7d6f44a0fa716a82969725516dc0b16bc7cd514 '''parisc: Fix data TLB miss in sba_unmap_sg'''] (backported to all)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d7da660cab47183cded65e11b64497d0f56c6edf '''parisc: Fix sglist access in ccio-dma.c'''] (backported to all)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6e8793674bb0d1135ca0e5c9f7e16fecbf815926 serial: parisc: GSC: fix build when IOSAPIC is not set] (backported to all)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=a97279836867b1cb50a3d4f0b1bf60e0abe6d46c '''parisc/unaligned: Fix ldw() and stw() unalignment handlers'''] (backported to all)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=dd2288f4a020d693360e3e8d72f8b9d9c25f5ef6 '''parisc/unaligned: Fix fldd and fstd unaligned handlers on 32-bit kernel'''] (backported to all)
* Kernel 5.18
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=df24e1783e6e0eb3dc0e3ba5a8df3bb0cc537408 '''parisc: Add vDSO support''']
** video/fbdev/stifb: Implement the stifb_fillrect() function
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b9f50eea4f277943842e82bc4d73f912a2f165c6 '''parisc: Always use the self-extracting kernel feature''']
** parisc: Add defines for various space register
** parisc: Use SR_USER and SR_KERNEL in get_user() and put_user()
** parisc: Use constants to encode the space registers like SR_KERNEL
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8278cc16266326f23c05f94d748569faa81319bb '''parisc: Reduce code size by optimizing get_current() function calls''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=df24e1783e6e0eb3dc0e3ba5a8df3bb0cc537408 '''parisc/unaligned: Use EFAULT fixup handler in unaligned handlers''']
** parisc/unaligned: Rewrite inline assembly of emulate_ldh()
** parisc/unaligned: Rewrite inline assembly of emulate_ldw()
** parisc/unaligned: Rewrite 32-bit inline assembly of emulate_ldd()
** parisc/unaligned: Rewrite 32-bit inline assembly of emulate_sth()
** parisc/unaligned: Enhance user-space visible output
** parisc: Avoid calling SMP cache flush functions on cache-less machines
** parisc: Enable ARCH_HAS_DEBUG_VM_PGTABLE
** parisc: Improve CPU socket and core bootup info text
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=9b046d0245cec982c72a65d3ea1b834959a9708b '''parisc: Avoid using hardware single-step in kprobes''']
** parisc: Avoid flushing cache on cache-less machines
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=df24e1783e6e0eb3dc0e3ba5a8df3bb0cc537408 '''parisc: Fix non-access data TLB cache flush faults''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=df24e1783e6e0eb3dc0e3ba5a8df3bb0cc537408 '''parisc: Fix handling off probe non-access faults''']
** parisc: Simplify fast path for non-access data TLB faults
** parisc: Increase parisc_cache_flush_threshold setting
** <del>[https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=53d862fac4a09b9c56cca0433fa9de5732fd05a1 '''parisc: Fix invalidate/flush vmap routines''']</del>
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=08a491b2e4b1c4c618ee82d3f4b0ff3b20c5acf5 '''Revert "parisc: Fix invalidate/flush vmap routines"''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=939fc856676c266c3bc347c1c1661872a3725c0f parisc: Fix CPU affinity for Lasi, WAX and Dino chips]
** parisc: Clean up cpu_check_affinity() and drop cpu_set_affinity_irq()
** parisc: Detect hppa-suse-linux-gcc compiler for cross-building
** parisc: Add constants for control registers and clean up mfctl()
** parisc: Ensure set_firmware_width() is called only once
** parisc: Switch from GENERIC_CPU_DEVICES to GENERIC_ARCH_TOPOLOGY
** parisc: Move store_cpu_topology() into text section
** parisc: Move CPU startup-related functions into .text section
** parisc: Move disable_sr_hashing_asm() into .text section
** parisc: Add PDC locking functions for rendezvous code
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=88b3aac6228baaac6a3bcc0808845083b9d9f08f parisc: Implement __cpu_die() and __cpu_disable() for CPU hotplugging]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=98903688e6106d9ca68e44c7d218e61336d54631 parisc: Rewrite arch_cpu_idle_dead() for CPU hotplugging]
** parisc: Move common_stext into .text section when CONFIG_HOTPLUG_CPU=y
** parisc: Find a new timesync master if current CPU is removed
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=a9fe7fa7d874a536e0540469f314772c054a0323 '''parisc: Fix patch code locking and flushing''']
** Revert "parisc: Mark cr16 CPU clocksource unstable on all SMP machines"
** Revert "parisc: Mark sched_clock unstable only if clocks are not syncronized"
** Revert "parisc: Fix patch code locking and flushing"
** parisc: Only list existing CPUs in cpu_possible_mask
** parisc: Update 32- and 64-bit defconfigs
** parisc: Re-enable GENERIC_CPU_DEVICES for !SMP
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=5b89966bc96a06f6ad65f64ae4b0461918fcc9d3 '''parisc: Merge model and model name into one line in /proc/cpuinfo'''] (backported to all)
** parisc: Change MAX_ADDRESS to become unsigned long long
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=340233dcc0160aafcce46ca893d1679f16acf409 '''parisc: Mark cr16 clock unstable on all SMP machines'''] (backported to v5.16+)
** Revert "parisc: Increase parisc_cache_flush_threshold setting"
** parisc: Fix typos in comments
** parisc: Disable debug code regarding cache flushes in handle_nadtlb_fault()
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=2de8b4cc2051ee1d40eedbcf94de0e7d04507c37 '''parisc: Rewrite cache flush code for PA8800/PA8900''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=798082be69fea995a475ca1db8f9873589e207d9 '''parisc: Fix patch code locking and flushing''']
* Kernel 5.19
** parisc: video: fbdev: stifb: Add sti_dump_font() to dump STI font
** parisc: Prevent ldil() to sign-extend into upper 32 bits
** parisc: Fix wrong comment for shr macro
** parisc: Add dep_safe() macro to deposit a register in 32- and 64-kernels
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c1770918492414e8dc103d996f3f3860ee0bfd6c '''parisc: Optimize tmpalias function calls''']
** parisc: Drop __ARCH_WANT_OLD_READDIR and __ARCH_WANT_SYS_OLDUMOUNT
** parisc: Don't enforce DMA completion order in cache flushes
** parisc: Don't hardcode assembler bit definitions in tmpalias code
** parisc/stifb: Implement fb_is_primary_device() (backported to v5.10+)
** parisc/stifb: Keep track of hardware path of graphics card  (backported to v5.10+) 
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6ba688364856ad083be537f08e86ba97f433d405 '''parisc: fix a crash with multicore scheduler'''] (backported to v5.18)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=1d0811b03eb30b2f0793acaa96c6ce90b8b9c87a parisc/stifb: Fix fb_is_primary_device() only available with CONFIG_FB_STI] (backported to v5.10+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=0a1355db36718178becd2bfe728a023933d73123 '''parisc: Enable ARCH_HAS_STRICT_MODULE_RWX'''] (backported to v5.2+)
** parisc: align '*' in comment in math-emu code
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e9ed22e6e5010997a2f922eef61ca797d0a2a246 '''parisc: Fix flush_anon_page on PA8800/PA8900'''] (backported to v5.18)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=96b80fcd2705fc50ebe1f7f3ce204e861b3099ab '''parisc/unaligned: Fix emulate_ldw() breakage'''] (backported to v5.18)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=aa78fa905b4431c432071a878da99c2b37fc0e79 '''parisc: Fix vDSO signal breakage on 32-bit kernel'''] (backported to v5.18)
* Kernel 6.0
** parisc: Clean up names in hardware database
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=cab56b51ec0e69128909cef4650e1907248d821b '''parisc: Fix device names in /proc/iomem'''] (backported to v4.9+)
** parisc: Drop pa_swapper_pg_lock spinlock
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6431e92fc827bdd2d28f79150d90415ba9ce0d21 '''parisc: io_pgetevents_time64() needs compat syscall in 32-bit compat mode'''] (backported to v5.1+)
** parisc: Fix comment typo in fault.c
** parisc: Drop zero variable initialisations in mm/init.c
** parisc: Check the return value of ioremap() in lba_driver_probe()
** Input: gscps2 - check return value of ioremap() in gscps2_probe()
** parisc: Do not initialise statics to 0
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=7ae1f5508d9a33fd58ed3059bd2d569961e3b8bd '''parisc: Fix exception handler for fldw and fstw instructions'''] (backported to all)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=3dcfb729b5f4a0c9b50742865cd5e6c4dbcc80dc'''parisc: Make CONFIG_64BIT available for ARCH=parisc64 only'''] (backported to v5.15+)
** Revert "parisc: Show error if wrong 32/64-bit compiler is being used"
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=591d2108f3abc4db9f9073cae37cf3591fd250d6 '''parisc: Add runtime check to prevent PA2.0 kernels on PA1.x machines''']
** parisc: ccio-dma: Fix typo in comment
** parisc: ccio-dma: Handle kmalloc failure in ccio_init_resources()
** parisc: led: Move from strlcpy with unused retval to strscpy
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=95363747a6f39e88a3052fcf6ce6237769495ce0 '''tools/include/uapi: Fix <asm/errno.h> for parisc and xtensa'''] (backported to v5.10+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=805ce8614958c925877ba6b6dc26cdf9f8800474 '''parisc: Allow CONFIG_64BIT with ARCH=parisc'''] (backported to v5.15+)
** parisc: remove obsolete manual allocation aligning in iosapic
** parisc: ccio-dma: Add missing iounmap in error path in ccio_probe()
* Kernel 6.1
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b148766e2b8b7b61c9aef53aefedae33f637a1e7 '''parisc: Reduce kernel size by packing alternative tables''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=027c3d345e2a1ea61d6e4506a250eb392e6e7b18 '''parisc: Convert PDC console to an early console''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=aca7c13d3bee81a968337a5515411409ae9d095d '''parisc: fbdev/stifb: Align graphics memory size to 4MB'''] (backported to all)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=70be49f2f6223ddd2fcddb0089a40864c37e1494 '''parisc: Fix userspace graphics card breakage due to pgtable special bit'''] (backported to v5.18+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e8a18e3f00f3ee8d07c17ab1ea3ad4df4a3b6fe0 parisc: Make 8250_gsc driver dependend on CONFIG_PARISC] (backported to all)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=9e4e2ce1a78ed92ed91135e90c85f27d75388129 '''parisc/serial: Rename 8250_gsc.c to 8250_parisc.c''']
** parisc: Use signed char for hardware path in pdc.h
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=a0c9f1f2e53b8eb2ae43987a30e547ba56b4fa18 '''parisc: Export iosapic_serial_irq() symbol for serial port driver'''] (backported to all)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=2b6ae0962b421103feb41a80406732944b0665b3 parisc: Avoid printing the hardware path twice] (backported to v4.19+)
** MAINTAINERS: adjust entry after renaming parisc serial driver
* Kernel 6.2
** parisc: Fix inconsistent indenting in setup_cmdline()
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=71bdea6f798b425bc0003780b13e3fdecb16a010 '''parisc: Align parisc MADV_XXX constants with all other architectures''']
** parisc: Drop PMD_SHIFT from calculation in pgtable.h (backported to v6.0+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=7236aae5f81f3efbd93d0601e74fc05994bc2580 '''parisc: Fix locking in pdc_iodc_print() firmware call'''] (backported to v6.0+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=7e6652c79ecd74e1112500668d956367dc3772a5 parisc: Drop duplicate kgdb_pdc console] (backported to v6.1+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=7dc4dbfe750e1f18c511e73c8ed114da8de9ff85 parisc: Drop locking in pdc console code] (backported to v6.1+)
** parisc: Move pdc_result struct to firmware.c
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=7dc4dbfe750e1f18c511e73c8ed114da8de9ff85 '''parisc: Add missing FORCE prerequisites in Makefile'''] (backported to v5.18+) 
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=4934fbfb3ff09b8500f63d4624ed8b41647bb822 parisc: Show MPE/iX model string at bootup]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=41f563ab3c33698bdfc3403c7c2e6c94e73681e4 parisc: led: Fix potential null-ptr-deref in start_task()] (backported to all)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=5d1335dabb3c493a3d6d5b233953b6ac7b6c1ff2 '''parisc: Fix return code of pdc_iodc_print()'''] (backported to all)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=3f0c17809a098d3f0c1ec83f1fb3ca61638d3dcd parisc: Replace hardcoded value with PRIV_USER constant in ptrace.c] (backported to v5.16+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=316f1f42b5cc1d95124c1f0387c867c1ba7b6d0e '''parisc: Wire up PTRACE_GETREGS/PTRACE_SETREGS for compat case'''] (backported to v4.7+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=f2193bb2ee6e21d9c2da10ea3ce63b94aea69341 parisc: pdc_stable: use strscpy() to instead of strncpy()]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=88d7b12068b95731c280af8ce88e8ee9561f96de '''highmem: round down the address passed to kunmap_flush_on_unmap()'''] - (backported to all)
* Kernel 6.3
** no patches
* Kernel 6.4
** parisc: Replace regular spinlock with spin_trylock on panic path
** parisc: Limit amount of kgdb breakpoints on parisc
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d755bd2caeb47fd806e12399fe8b56798fa5d2cc '''parisc: Ensure page alignment in flush functions'''] (backported to 6.0+)
** parisc: Drop HP-UX constants and structs from grfioctl.h
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6e3220ba3323a2c24be834aebf5d6e9f89d0993f '''parisc: Fix argument pointer in real64_call_asm()'''] (backported to all)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=567b35159e76997e95b643b9a8a5d9d2198f2522 '''parisc: Cleanup mmap implementation regarding color alignment''']
** parisc: update kbuild doc. aliases for parisc64
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6f9e98849edaa8aefc4030ff3500e41556e83ff7 '''parisc: Fix encoding of swp_entry due to added SWP_EXCLUSIVE flag'''] (backported to v6.3+)
** parisc: kexec: include reboot.h
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=59fa12646d9f56c842b4d5b6418ed77af625c588 parisc: Improve cache flushing for PCXL in arch_sync_dma_for_cpu()]
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=d703797380c540bbeac03f104ebcfc364eaf47cc '''parisc: Flush gatt writes and adjust gatt mask in parisc_agp_mask_memory()''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b6405f0829d7b1dd926ba3ca5f691cab835abfaa '''parisc: Use num_present_cpus() in alternative patching code'''] 
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=15e64ef6520ea8702998db05b87fa5c3d3d40710 '''parisc: Add lightweight spinlock checks'''] (backported to v6.1+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=adf8e96a7ea670d45b5de7594acc67e8f4787ae6 '''parisc: Enable LOCKDEP support''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=2028315cf59bb899a5ac7e87dc48ecb8fac7ac24 '''parisc: Allow to reboot machine after system halt'''] (backported to v4.14+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=df419492e428b6a2bce98d0f613c58a13da6666c '''parisc: Handle kprobes breakpoints only in kernel context'''] (backported to v5.18+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=6888ff04e37d01295620a73f3f7efbc79f6ef152 '''parisc: Handle kgdb breakpoints only in kernel context'''] (backported to v5.4+)
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=61e150fb310729c98227a5edf6e4a3619edc3702 '''parisc: Fix flush_dcache_page() for usage from irq context'''] (backported to v5.18+) (and all)
* Kernel 6.5
** parisc: Move TLB_PTLOCK option to Kconfig.debug
** parisc: Check if IRQs are disabled when calling arch_local_irq_restore()
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c6d96328fecdda16e12f3b3c33f3677f4bcef89f '''parisc: Add cacheflush() syscall''']
** parisc: Fix missing prototype warning for arch_report_meminfo()
** parisc: Default to 8 CPUs for 64-bit kernel
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=ededd9d27834ad1f300436c1b78e58ad4fcf5dd7 '''sticon/parisc: Allow 64-bit STI calls in PDC firmware abstration''']
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=99ef0c67bc85e2ea547e2c6c9ed29480cd361446 '''sticon/parisc: Fix STI console on 64-bit only machines''']
** parisc: sba_iommu: Fix kdoc warnings
** parisc: Fold 32-bit compat code into audit_classify_syscall()
** parisc: drivers: Fix kdoc warnings
** parisc: firmware: Fix kdoc warnings
** parisc: pdc_chassis: Fix kdoc warnings
** parisc: module: Mark symindex __maybe_unused
** parisc: Mark image_size __maybe_unused in perf_write()
** parisc: pci-dma: Make pcxl_alloc_range() static
** parisc: pdc_stable: Fix kdoc and compiler warnings
** parisc: ccio-dma: Fix kdoc and compiler warnings
** parisc: sys_parisc: parisc_personality() is called from asm code
** parisc: processor: Fix kdoc for init_cpu_profiler()
** parisc: traps: Mark functions static
** parisc: init: Drop unused variable end_paddr
** parisc: unwind: Mark start and stop variables __maybe_unused
** parisc: signal: Mark do_notify_resume() and sys_rt_sigreturn() asmlinkage
** parisc: unaligned: Include header file to avoid missing prototype warnings
** parisc: lba_pci: Mark two variables __maybe_unused
** parisc: dino: Make dino_init() returning void
** parisc: Move init function declarations into header file
** parisc: irq: Add irq-related function declarations
** parisc: Refresh defconfigs
** parport: gsc: remove DMA leftover code
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=c2ff2b736c41cc63bb0aaec85cccfead9fbcfe92 '''parisc/mm: preallocate fixmap page tables at init'''] (backported to v6.3)
** parisc: pci-dma: remove unused and dead EISA code and comment
** parisc: unaligned: Add required spaces after ','
** [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=a0f4b7879f2e14986200747d1b545e5daac8c624 '''parisc: Fix lightweight spinlock checks to not break futexes'''] (backported to v6.4+)
** parisc: fault: Use C99 arrary initializers
** parisc: ioremap: Fix sparse warnings
** parisc: signal: Fix sparse incorrect type in assignment warning
** parisc: firmware: Fix sparse context imbalance warnings
** parisc: firmware: Mark pdc_result buffers local
** parisc: ucmpdi2: Fix no previous prototype for '__ucmpdi2' warning
** parisc: parisc_ksyms: Include libgcc.h for libgcc prototypes
** parisc: dma: Add prototype for pcxl_dma_start
** parisc: Move proc_mckinley_root and proc_runway_root to sba_iommu
** parisc: unaligned: Include linux/sysctl.h for unaligned_enabled
** parisc: processor: Include asm/smp.h for init_per_cpu()
** parisc: boot: Nuke some sparse warnings in decompressor
** parisc: ftrace: Add declaration for ftrace_function_trampoline()
** parisc: perf: Make cpu_device variable static
** parisc: pdt: Use PTR_ERR_OR_ZERO() to simplify code

== Debian kernel and userspace programs ==
* PALO (http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/deller/palo.git/)
** DONE: increase palo command line from 128 bytes (max from kernel is 1024 currently) -> fixed in palo 1.92. 
** DONE: accept /boot/ in front of files, strip path (e.g. "/boot") when given for kernel/ramdisk 
** DONE: Migrate to git.kernel.org -> done: http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/deller/palo.git/
** DONE: add gzip-support (allow loading gzipped vmlinux files)
** DONE: in interactive mode, add reboot option command
** DONE: [https://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/deller/palo.git/commit/?id=70bd7a9a41e318c0575755a78c4d18ad97495c47 '''Unbreak loading Linux kernels bigger than 16 MB'''] (fixed in palo 1.96, Oct. 2016)
** DONE: Du to alternative coding in 4.20, ship debian kernel as SMP variant only (Kernel 4.20)
** DONE: PALO: Enable "list directory content" of other partiton than /boot (done in v2.22)

Debian kernel / Generic Kernel bugs fixed
** DONE: Fixed 64bit SMP kernel & sticon on machines with more than 4GB RAM (Kernel 3.12)
** DONE: Lots of syscall fixes regarding compat kernel
** DONE: send patches to remove UP from debian kernels, use sil680 instead of siimage, see http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=721191 -> fixed in 3.12 / 3.13
** DONE: Enable BMC in c8000 default kernel config - ipmi driver (CONFIG_IPMI_HANDLER=y) - http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=747482
** DONE: remove HIL RTC from debian kernel - it creates a backtrace at boot because we have already another rtc0 active.
** DONE: add ppdev driver, needed by CUPS, systemd reports missing module load (3.17 & 3.16 kernel)
** DONE: Add crc-modules, event, isofs, jfs, mouse, sata, sound, squashfs, udf, uinput, scsi-common, scsi-extra, loop, serial and usb-serial debian-installer packages
** DONE: Kernel build problem: a) disable -mfast-indirect-calls in Makefile, b) gcc compiler bug in > gcc-4.8.3-3
** DONE: Drop HPUX-support from kernel (Kernel 4.0)
** DONE: implemented HUGE pages
** DONE: kernel timerfd_settime/timerfd_gettime issue, test with debian package:  liblinux-fd-perl -> https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/7951661/, backported to all kernels
** DONE: kernel ptrace bug: http://thread.gmane.org/gmane.linux.ports.parisc/26273, possible fix: https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/8063301/
** DONE: Implement CONFIG_DEBUG_STACK_USAGE, in kernel 4.6
** DONE: Use 32bit exception table entries, in kernel 4.6
** DONE: implemented seccomp syscal, including SECCOMP_MODE_STRICT and mode 2
** DONE: Fixed FTRACE support (http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=366dd4ea9d5f0eb78fdf4982d76506f99480ec0a)
** DONE: Add syscall ftrace support
** DONE: Simplify get_user()/put_user() with regard to %sr0/%sr2 usage.
** DONE: Add tracehook support (needed for seccomp testcases, gdb, ...)
** DONE: Added high-resolution sched_clock clocksources in 4.7, needed for debian packages: ismrmrd, haskell-http-conduit, ... 
** DONE: Detect physically broken memory via Page Deallocation Table (PDT), initial support in kernel 4.13
** DONE: Make kernel self-decompressing (instead of palo reading gzipped kernels)
** DONE: fix %pF and %pS usage in all kernel code
** DONE: Enabled BMC/IPMI including Remote power on/off on C8000 and rp3410 machines (kernel 4.17 and above)
** DONE: use CONFIG_COMPAT_BINFMT_ELF and get rid of arch/parisc/kernel/binfmt_elf32.c
** DONE: Fix kernel writing core file, gdb reporting: BFD: Warning: /tmp/core.http.1655.ls3011.1465554447 is truncated: expected core file size >= 2187264, found: 2121728.
** DONE: Find way to extract vmlinux out of vmlinuz (Kernel 4.19)
** DONE: Implement alternative coding for UP & SMP, one debian kernel for UP and SMP, optimizations to avoid cache flushes on cache-less systems and other qemu-related speed-ups to avoid unnecessary syncronization (Kernel 4.20) 
** DONE: IRQ Balancing was broken, http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=f73493eb4aecdd6edd8a749890e6e2dcfa0a7978
** DONE: Added kgdb and kprobes in kernel 5.2, by Sven Schnelle
** DONE: report on C8000 one socket with 2 cores
** DONE: Check Kernel boot code if RAM of machine is big enough (e.g. is booting on 710 machine with 60MB possible?) - https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/10888283/
** DONE: convert to SPARSEMEM, instead of DISCONTIGMEM
** DONE: (NOT POSSIBLE:) Enable huge pages on kernel text for C8000 as well - not possible, will crash due to required equivalent aliasing of caches.
** DONE: Enable __ro_after_init
** DONE: add dynamic ftrace support - provided by Sven in kernel 5.3
** DONE: Fix fallouts from strace: http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=b7dc5a071ddf69c0350396b203cba32fe5bab510, 
** DONE: implement kexec syscall
** DONE: Analyze futex hang (CPU soft lockup) situation with test-lock testcase in the libprelude debian package - fixed by [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=be6577af0cef934ccb036445314072e8cb9217b9 '''parisc: Add atomic64_set_release() define to avoid CPU soft lockups''']
** DONE: Add TOC handler, sending TOC via IPMI interface "toc s"
** DONE: autofs/automounter is broken, patch sent to list, https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=892953
** DONE: Try enabling DEBUG_VM_PGTABLE in kernel
** DONE: SLAB breaks, SLUB works (works in kernel v5.17)
** DONE: implement .con_font_set (consw) in sticon.c to be able to change fonts at runtime (since v5.10)
** DONE: Implement kernel [[VDSO]] support - [https://lore.kernel.org/linux-parisc/4544A34A.6080700@tausq.org/ Randolphs patch]
** DONE: Fixed PTRACE_GETREGS/PTRACE_SETREGS for compat case, fixes strace errors 
** DONE: add CONFIG_LOCKDEP support (v6.4)

* Debian installer:
** DONE: test xorriso (Thomas Schmitt, scdbackup)
** DONE: Build real debian-installer CD. See: https://wiki.debian.org/Simple-CDD/Howto
** DONE: we need a kernel debian package (3.10 based or higher)
** DONE: [http://anonscm.debian.org/cgit/d-i/attic/palo-installer.git/ palo-installer: fix palo entry "root=/dev/sda5" to become "root=UUID=XXXX"]  

* binutils:
** DONE: Add linker -fpie support, https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=18421, debian package iceweasel and others
** DONE: Using "gcc -o /dev/null" gives "ld: final link failed: File truncated" error: https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=19526

* gcc:
** DONE: Linker reports "XXX referenced in section `.data.rel.ro.local' of YYY: defined in discarded section `.text._ZXXX"
*** [https://sourceware.org/git/gitweb.cgi?p=binutils-gdb.git;a=commitdiff;h=da6e19a92645583da12dc2d15f54d2bd240fd3f2;hp=7d8a636c9a234354c9b2ecf01b6e405bece190a1 binutils fix in bfd/elf32-hppa] and [https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=67834 gcc upstream bug report] and [https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=801531 Debian binutils bug report]
** DONE: Qt5/KDE signal & slot issue: Pointers to method types need canonicalization before comparison, fixed in gcc: https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=68079
** DONE: Add wiki page about kernel cross-compiling

* glibc:
** DONE: Problem building libcap-ng...The problem is the call to __tls_get_addr clobbers the value loaded into %r26 for the printf call. -> http://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=59777 
** DONE: O_SYNC wrongly defined in glibc (typo in hppa __O_SYNC define in <bits/fcntl.h>)
** DONE: eglibc mmap bug with localedef (see debian bugzilla http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=741243)
** DONE: Wrong __gmon_start__ symbol, showed in vlc - linker does not drop dependencies to unneeded shared libs, https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=770741. glibc bug report: https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=19170
** DONE: nss - dladdr from glibc returns wrong names on hppa, http://article.gmane.org/gmane.linux.ports.parisc/26290, Solution: https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=19415
** DONE: gcc userspace support for variable CAS (gcc atomic ops, __sync_XXX), initial support in kernel 3.17, http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=89206491201cbd1571009b36292af781cef74c1b)
*** gcc-4.9 commit: https://gcc.gnu.org/viewcvs/gcc?view=revision&revision=227914
*** gcc-5.0 commit: https://gcc.gnu.org/viewcvs/gcc?view=revision&revision=227913
*** packages needing rebuild: libatomic-ops (gauche and libgc have copies of libatomic-ops included), x265, ceph, lizardfs, firebird2.5, gauche, idba, mapsembler2, padevchooser, filezilla, idba, http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=785654
*** __sync_val_compare_and_swap_8 was missing in: openvdb, idba, lizardfs, ...
** DONE: [https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=20243 Misaligned access in res_query.c HEADER struct] fixed in [https://sourceware.org/git/?p=glibc.git;a=commit;h=05dec22d7be722987ff07aebf9690f6078b3c4e9 this glibc commit] 

* Debian userspace:
** DONE: qt4-x11: Improve atomic support on parisc (https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=741190)
** DONE: haskell (ghc) hangs: futex(0xea00d08e, FUTEX_WAIT_PRIVATE, 2, NULL) = -1 EINVAL (Invalid argument). Solution: https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=756260#15
** DONE: port openmpi package: https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=776730
** DONE: Fix msgpuck build breakage: https://buildd.debian.org/status/package.php?p=msgpuck&suite=sid
** DONE: Fix sbuild not returning used disc size: /usr/share/perl5/Sbuild/Build.pm line 2786, see https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=923484
** DONE: Why does mc hangs when exiting with F10? - https://midnight-commander.org/ticket/3887 - endianess bug in mc source code
** DONE: capnproto - testsuite was wrong: PARISC uses mips-floatingpoint NANs - https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=781787

* QEMU:
** DONE: Add kernel fw_cfg support (drivers/firmware/qemu_fw_cfg.c)
** DONE: Fix mouse in with HP-UX 10 and 11 - reported by Stefano Repici
** DONE: Add bigger fonts to STI ROM / SeaBIOS 
** DONE: Implement TOC in qemu (via qemu monitor -> NMI)
** DONE: Fix X11 cursor emulation in HP-UX with help of Xorg 11.6.6 sources, fixed in qemu v7.1
** DONE: Fix serial port assignment and pass-through, fixed in qemu v7.1
** DONE: Check why ldd doesn't work with qemu chroot -> misexecuttion of proberi instruction: https://lists.nongnu.org/archive/html/qemu-devel/2022-08/msg02338.html
** DONE: Fix glibc iconv issues with qemu: https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=29583
** DONE: bug in kernel fldw unalignment exception handler which lets libime fail to build on real hardware (but builds with qemu!) 
** DONE: Add vDSO trampoline to qemu-user
** DONE: [https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=970460 qemu-user: trashes argv0 breaking multi-call binaries], leads to build failures in lilypond, fceux, perl, sane-backends ... Fixed, needs [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=2347961b11d4079deace3c81dceed460c08a8fc1 kernel v5.12+] and [https://git.qemu.org/?p=qemu.git;a=commit;h=6e1c0d7b951e19c53b8467e8bc4b71ee73a394ea qemu v6.0+],  or alternatively apply [https://github.com/hdeller/qemu-hppa/commit/540e8fb618e66b4c172cc528c12580bb09e301b6 linux-user: handle binfmt-misc P flag as a separate exe name]

== ABI breakages (e.g. dropped HP-UX support) ==
* '''Kernel 3.14 (EWOULDBLOCK)'''
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=f5a408d53edef3af07ac7697b8bc54a755628450 We dropped HP-UX support in kernel 3.14 by changing EWOULDBLOCK==EAGAIN.] HP-UX could be run in a VM instead or since machines are relatively cheap now, if someone needs hpux, they can buy a machine for it (or use qemu) 
* '''Kernel 3.16 (SIGRTMIN)'''
** [http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=1f25df2eff5b25f52c139d3ff31bc883eee9a0ab Changed SIGRTMIN to 32 (from 37)]
** [http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=766605 debian glibc report]  and   [http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=766635 debian kernel bug report]
** September 7th 2014: First delivery with vmlinux-3.16.0-4 (aka linux-image-3.16.0-4-parisc64-smp_3.16.7-1_hppa.deb)
** How to install:
*** Install the new glibc debian package, then install systemd, then install the new kernel package (this will create a new initrd), reboot
** rebuild of the following packages was needed:
*** unxz-utils: rebuild unxz to fix usage of SIGXFSZ
*** strace and gdb: fix signal names/numbers
*** libgc: gives "Cannot set SIG_THR_RESTART handler" error since SIG_THR_RESTART has been SIGXCPU which is now used for threads
*** (maybe) gcc-4.9 which links against libgc...? (affects objc related code only)
*** dietlibc (patch sent upstream) - https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=769105   TODO: make patch for dietlibc to use LONG_LONG_PAIR for ftruncate64() and then rebuild util-vserver package
* '''Kernel 4.19 (ENOTSUP)'''
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=93cb8e20d56be40c541475f77b5f565fbb385a4b Dropped ENOTSUP (252) constant from kernel with v4.19]. Gave problems and parisc is only platform which defined it because of HP-UX, see libuv bug: https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=900237. Nevertheless rebuild of libattr, libseliux and fakeroot necessary.
* '''Kernel 5.10: Define O_NONBLOCK to become 000200000 (instead of 000200004):''' 
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=75ae04206a4d0e4f541c1d692b7febd1c0fdb814 '''parisc: Define O_NONBLOCK to become 000200000''']
** [http://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=44a4c9e443674e6cd3368d3e642dfe9c429d5525 '''parisc: Add wrapper syscalls to fix O_NONBLOCK flag usage''']
** [https://sourceware.org/git?p=glibc.git;a=commit;h=a24f414ba11a7acdf3c5ccec3fb327fc72166556 '''GLIBC PATCH: Remove obsolete defines for HPUX support from fcntl.h and update O_NONBLOCK.''']
** [https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=974690 ''dietlibc Debian bug report'']
* '''Kernel 6.1 (MADV_WIPEONFORK, MADV_KEEPONFORK, ...)'''
** This patch [https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=71bdea6f798b425bc0003780b13e3fdecb16a010 '''parisc: Align parisc MADV_XXX constants with all other architectures'''] changed some MADV values to have the same number as other platforms (exception: alpha arch). Even if that's an ABI change, the patch includes a wrapper to translate the values, so that old binaries will continue to work. There were build issues in aws-crt-python, qemu-user, tor browser and boringssl.

== Considerations between Debian unstable and Debian Jessie release ==
Jessie was not stable on SMP machines, particularly those with PA8800/PA8900 processors.
It's recommended to use kernel 4.4.15 or later. 
The current default gcc for unstable is gcc 5.4. Most hppa fixes have been back ported to 4.9 but not all. 
It shouldn't hurt to use binutils from unstable.
Debian glibc 2.23 is best. Most old packages should still work although there maybe inequivalent aliasing issues
which are relevant on PA8800. There's also a nasty issue with gmon_start being in every shared library in Jessie.
This caused a few headaches and potentially breaks applications when it's removed from a library. If you
stick with the glibc in Jessie, multithreaded applications may not work as well as they could,
but maybe that's not important.
The kernel update is the most important one.
Since hppa moved to ports, there has been a huge number of bug fixes. System stability is
dramatically improved and I believe more packages are available than ever before. It's better to run unstable
and just be selective about running "apt-get upgrade".
(by Dave Anglin)

== parisc-linux.org Homepage and Debian build server infrastructure work ==
* DONE: Ask Thibaut to add ftp mirror of http://ftp.parisc-linux.org/debian_ports on http://www.fr.parisc-linux.org/ 
* DONE: Set up a buildd server for debian-ports/unstable & experimental -> http://unstable.buildd.net/index-hppa.html
* DONE: contact pannonmage@gmail.com (Nemeth Balint, Budapest) to set up buildd server - mail from 04.08.2013
* Offer from Mike Hosken <mike@csystems.co.nz> for A400 system as buildd - mail from 18.09.2014 and 17.05.2015
* DONE: set up buildd server on ESIEE's A500 (Thibaut) - mail from 13.08.2013
* DONE Sep 12 2014: migrate mail forward service for parisc-linux.org to A500 machine
* DONE Sep 12 2014: restore web-based http://ftp.parisc-linux.org service
* DONE Nov 24 2014: Import old hppa mailing list archives to gmane.org - http://dir.gmane.org/gmane.linux.ports.parisc
* Homepage migration:
** DONE: Migration of parisc-linux.org website to https://parisc.wiki.kernel.org
** DONE: Migration of wiki.parisc-linux.org website to https://parisc.wiki.kernel.org
** DONE: Domain owner before: Matt Taggart <matt@lackof.org>, Expiration Date:09-Aug-2014; Since August 2014 is Helge Deller domain owner of parisc-linux.org
** DONE: DNS takeover by Thibaut Varenet on 11/11/2013 - see: http://article.gmane.org/gmane.linux.ports.parisc/5478
** DONE: former Server administrator of parisc-linux.org: Dann Frazier - dannf@dannf.org, former technical contact at HP: brett.johnson@hp.com, Since August 2014 administrator/owner: Helge Deller

== Linus Torvalds barking at parisc ==
* https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=19b9ad67310ed2f685062a00aec602bec33835f0

= Testsuites, kernel and userspace testing tools =

* GLIBC issues and todos: https://sourceware.org/glibc/wiki/PortStatus
* https://github.com/linux-test-project/ltp - Linux Test Project
* http://codemonkey.org.uk/projects/trinity/ - Trinity - A Linux System call fuzz tester.

= TODO Drivers =

* write Lasi floppy driver
* write Suckyio floppy driver
* write spifi driver (rbrad)
* modify ncr53c8xx driver for Outfield (735 & 755)
* write GSC FDDI driver
* write Timi ASIC (74x) support
* EISA DMA support

== Review all the todo entries below! ==

* ns87415 dma doesn't work reliably on suckyio-systems
* fix HIL problem: ksoftirqd/0 eats 56% cpu (kernel 2.4 & kernel 2.6) - see FAQ: http://www.parisc-linux.org/faq/index.html and http://article.gmane.org/gmane.linux.ports.parisc/278/match=use+lower+nice+level+ksoftirqd+hil+enabled