---
title: ToolChain
---

= Toolchain =

In order to build applications you need:

* A compiler: [[gcc]] has built parisc-linux targets since version 3.x
* A linker: GNU [[binutils]] supplies the linker, assembler and various binary utilities
* A library: GNU [[glibc]] supplies this
* And maybe a debugger: [[gdb]] in case you want to figure out why "it's not working?!"

These elements are called the “tool chain”. The palinux tool chain is somewhat temperamental. However, palinux builds are now self hosting (the installed system can compile and build itself) 

Currently, only 32-bit userspace is well-supported. There has been some discussions to implement a 64-bit userspace ([[userspace64]]), but a lot of work still needs to be done.

While there are some documents that describe the PA-RISC runtime, there is also a lot of undocumented pieces. Some information is collected below:

* The PA-RISC Linux 32-bit ELF runtime is based heavily on the HPUX 32-bit [http://ftp.parisc-linux.org/docs/arch/pa-runtime-32-SOM.pdf SOM runtime].
* Summary of the [[RuntimeConventions]]
* The 32-bit and 64-bit ELF relocations are described in the [http://ftp.parisc-linux.org/docs/arch/elf-pa-hp.pdf Processor-specific supplement for PA-RISC]. Not all the relocations described in that document are implemented currently.
* [[StackUnwinding]] explains how stack frames are setup on palinux, and how to unwind through them

Currently, we are working on supporting [[ThreadLocalStorage]] and NPTL for glibc.

There is also a [[MonoPorting]] effort underway.